
THE TEN-FOOT CHAIN

OR CAN LOVE SURVIVE THE SHACKLES?




[Illustration: "WHEN I LOOK INTO YOUR FACE THE SUN RISES AND THE BOAT OF
MY LIFE ROCKS ON THE DANCING WAVES OF PASSION."]




    THE
    TEN-FOOT CHAIN

    OR

    CAN LOVE SURVIVE
    THE SHACKLES?

    A UNIQUE SYMPOSIUM

    BY

    ACHMED ABDULLAH
    MAX BRAND
    E. K. MEANS
    P. P. SHEEHAN

    REYNOLDS PUBLISHING COMPANY, INC.
    NEW YORK
    1920


    _Copyright 1920_
    REYNOLDS PUB. CO. Inc.

    _Copyright 1920_
    THE FRANK A. MUNSEY CO.




CONTENTS


                                      PAGE

    INTRODUCTION                        11

    FIRST TALE
        AN INDIAN JATAKA                17
            _By Achmed Abdullah_

    SECOND TALE
        OUT OF THE DARK                 45
            _By Max Brand_

    THIRD TALE
        PLUMB NAUSEATED                 81
            _By E. K. Means_

    FOURTH TALE
        PRINCESS OR PERCHERON          127
            _By Perley P. Sheehan_




_INTRODUCTION_


Some time ago I was dining with four distinguished writers. Needless to
say where two or three authors are gathered together with a sympathetic
editor in their midst, the flood-gates of fancy are opened wide.

In an inspired moment, Dr. Means tossed this "tremendous trifle" into
the center of the table: "What mental and emotional reaction would a man
and a woman undergo, linked together by a ten-foot chain, for three days
and nights?" The query precipitated an uproar.

Captain Abdullah stepped into the arena at once, and with that Ã©lan of
the heart, which is bred only in the Orient, declared if the man and the
woman really loved one another, no chain could be riveted too close or
too enduring to render onerous its existence. For through this world and
the next, love would hold these twain in ever deeper and tenderer
embrace.

Then the doctor, who claims he cuts nearer to the realities, insisted no
emotion could bear such a physical impact. The reaction from such an
imposed contact would leave love bereft of life, strangled in its own
golden mesh. Max Brand begged to differ with both of his fellow
craftsmen. With the cold detachment of a mind prepared to see all four
sides of an object and with no personal animus of either prejudice or
prepossession, Mr. Brand averred no blanker conclusion covered the case
in question but in any given instance, the multiple factors of heredity,
environment, habit, and temperament, would largely determine the final
state of both the man and the woman.

Hereupon, Perley Poore Sheehan, the fourth member of the writing
fraternity present, insisted on a hearing. Mr. Sheehan, nothing daunted
by the naturally polygamous instincts of the male heart, insisted a good
man, once in love, would and could discount the handicap of a ten-foot
chain, since love was after all, as others have contended, not the whole
of a man's life. To be sure it was an integral need, a recurrent
appetite; the glamour and the glory, if you like, enfolding with its
overshadowing wings his house of happiness. As for the woman--well, we
will let Mr. Sheehan report, in person, his conviction as to the
stability of her attachment.

The editor, whose business it is to keep an open mind, scarcely felt
equal to the responsibility of passing judgment, where experts differed.
But the discussion presented an opportunity which he felt called upon to
develop. Therefore, each of the four authors was invited to present his
conclusions in fiction form, the four stories to be published under the
general caption "The Ten-Foot Chain." Herewith we are printing this
unique symposium, one of the most original series ever presented.

Naturally, the stories are bound to provoke opinion and raise
discussion. The thesis in the form presented by Dr. Means is quite
novel, but the underlying problem of the stability of human affections,
is as old as the heart of man. Wasn't it that prosaic but wise old poet,
Alexander Pope, who compared our minds to our watches? "No two go just
alike, yet each believes his own."




FIRST TALE

AN INDIAN JATAKA

BY ACHMED ABDULLAH

    _This is the tale which Jehan Tugluk Khan, a wise man in
    Tartary, and milk brother to Ghengiz Khan, Emperor of the East
    and the North, and Captain General of the Golden Horde,
    whispered to the Foolish Virgin who came to him, bringing the
    purple, spiked flower of the Kadam-tree as an offering, and
    begging him for a love potion with which to hold Haydar Khan, a
    young, red-faced warrior from the west who had ridden into camp,
    a song on his lips, a woman's breast scarf tied to his tufted
    bamboo lance, a necklace of his slain foes' skulls strung about
    his massive chest, and sitting astride a white stallion whose
    mane was dyed crimson in sign of strife and whose dainty,
    dancing feet rang on the rose-red marble pavement of the
    emperor's courtyard like crystal bells in the wind of spring._

    _This is a tale of passion, and, by the same token, a tale of
    wisdom. For, in the yellow, placid lands east of the Urals and
    west of harsh, sneering Pekin, it is babbled by the toothless
    old women who know life, that wisdom and desire are twin sisters
    rocked in the same cradle: one speaks while the other sings.
    They say that it is the wisdom of passion which makes eternal
    the instinct of love._

    _This is the tale of Vasantasena, the slave who was free in her
    own heart, and of Madusadan, a captain of horse, who plucked the
    white rose without fearing the thorns._

   _This, finally, is the tale of Vikramavati, King of Hindustan in
   the days of the Golden Age, when Surya, the Sun, warmed the
   fields without scorching; when Vanyu, the Wind, filled the air
   with the pollen of the many flowers without stripping the trees
   bare of leaves; when Varuna, Regent of Water, sang through the
   land without destroying the dykes or drowning the lowing cattle
   and the little naked children who played at the river's bank;
   when Prithwi, the Earth, sustained all and starved none; when
   Chandra, the Moon, was as bright and ripening as his elder
   brother, the Sun._

    _LET ALL THE WISE CHILDREN LISTEN TO MY JATAKA!_


Vasantasena was the girl's name, and she came to young King
Vikramavati's court on the tenth day of the dark half of the month
Bhadra. She came as befitted a slave captured in war, with her
henna-stained feet bound together by a thin, golden chain, her white
hands tied behind her back with ropes of pearls, her slim young body
covered with a silken robe of the sad hue of the tamala flower, in sign
of mourning for Dharma, her father, the king of the south, who had
fallen in battle beneath the steel-shod tusks of the war elephants.

She knelt before the peacock throne, and Vikramavati saw that her face
was as beautiful as the moon on the fourteenth day, that her black locks
were like female snakes, her waist like the waist of a she-lion, her
arms like twin marble columns blue-veined, her skin like the sweetly
scented champaka flower, and her breasts as the young tinduka fruit.

He looked into her eyes and saw that they were of a deep bronze color,
gold flecked, and with pupils that were black and opaque--eyes that
seemed to hold all the wisdom, all the secret mockery, the secret
knowledge of womanhood--and his hand trembled, and he thought in his
soul that the bountiful hand of Sravanna, the God of Plenty, had been
raised high in the western heaven at the hour of her birth.

"Remember the words of the Brahmin," grumbled Deo Singh, his old prime
minister who had served his father before him and who was watching him
anxiously, jealously. "'Woman is the greatest robber of all. For other
robbers steal property which is spiritually worthless, such as gold and
diamonds; while woman steals the best--a man's heart, and soul, and
ambition, and strength.' Remember, furthermore, the words of--"

"Enough croakings for the day, Leaky-Tongue!" cut in Vikramavati, with
the insolent rashness of his twenty-four years. "Go home to your
withered beldame of a wife and pray with her before the altar of unborn
children, and help her clean the household pots. This is the season when
I speak of love!"

"Whose love--yours or the girl's?" smilingly asked Madusadan, captain of
horse, a man ten years the king's senior, with a mocking, bitter eye, a
great, crimson mouth, a crunching chest, massive, hairy arms, the honey
of eloquence on his tongue, and a mind that was a deer in leaping, a cat
in climbing. Men disliked him because they could not beat him in joust
or tournament; and women feared him because the purity of his life,
which was an open book, gave the lie to his red lips and the
slow-eddying flame in his hooded, brown eyes. "Whose love, wise king?"

But the latter did not hear.

He dismissed the soldiers and ministers and courtiers with an impatient
gesture, and stepped down from his peacock throne.

"Fool!" said Madusadan, as he looked through a slit in the curtain from
an inner room and saw that the king was raising Vasantasena to her feet;
saw, too, the derisive patience in her golden eyes.

"A fool--though a king versed in statecraft!" he whispered into the ear
of Shivadevi, Vasantasena's shriveled, gnarled hill nurse who had
followed her mistress into captivity.

"Thee! A fool indeed!" cackled the old nurse as, side by side with the
captain of horse, she listened to the tale of love the king was
spreading before the slave girl's narrow, white feet, as Kama-Deva, the
young God of Passion, spread the tale of his longing before Rati, his
wife, with the voice of the cuckoo, the humming-bee in mating time, and
the southern breeze laden with lotus.

"You came to me a slave captured among the crackling spears of battle,"
said Vikramavati, "and behold, it is I who am the slave. For your sake I
would sin the many sins. For the sake of one of your precious eyelashes
I would spit on the names of the gods and slaughter the holy cow. You
are a light shining in a dark house. Your body is a garden of strange
and glorious flowers which I gather in the gloom. I feel the savor and
shade of your dim tresses, and think of the home land where the hill
winds sweep.

"My love for you is as the soft sweetness of wild honey which the bees
of the forest have gathered among the perfumed asoka flowers--sweet and
warm, but with a sharp after-taste to prick the tongue and set the body
eternally longing. To hold you I would throw a noose around the far
stars. I give you all I have, all I am, all I shall ever be, and it
would not be the thousandth part of my love for you. See! My heart is a
carpet for your little lisping feet. Step gently, child!"

Vasantasena replied never a word. With unwinking, opaque eyes, she
stared beyond the king, at a slit in the curtain which separated the
throne-room from the inner apartment. For through the embroidered folds
of the brocade, a great, hairy, brown, high-veined hand was thrust, the
broad thumb wagging mockingly, meaningly, like a shadow of fate.

And she remembered the huge star sapphire set in hammered silver that
twinkled on the thumb like a cresset of passion. She remembered how that
hand had plucked her from amidst the horse's trampling feet and the
sword-rimmed wheels of the war-chariots as she crouched low above her
father's body. She remembered the voice that had come to her, clear
through the clamor and din of battle, the braying of the conches, the
neighing of the stallions, the shrill, angry trumpeting of the
elephants--

A voice sharp, compelling, bitter--

"Captive to my bow and spear, little flower, but a slave for the king,
my master. For such is the law of Hind. He will love you--not being
altogether a fool. But perhaps you will not love him. Being but a
stammering virgin boy, perhaps he will heap your lap with all the
treasures in the world. Being an honest gentleman, perhaps he will treat
you with respect and tenderness, with the sweet fairness of the blessed
gods. And perhaps--even then--you will not love him, little flower.

"Perhaps you will turn to the captain of horse as the moon rises like a
bubble of passion from the deep red of the sunset. Perhaps you will read
the meaning of the koel-bird's love-cry, the secret of the jessamine's
scent, the sweet, throbbing, winglike call of all the unborn children in
the heart and body and soul of Madusadan, captain of horse."

"A bold man, this captain of horse!" Vasantasena had smiled through her
tears, through the savage clang of battle.

"A reckless man--yet a humble man, little flower. Reckless and humble as
the moist spring monsoon that sweeps over the young shoots of
bluish-white rice. For"--here he had put her in front of him, on the
curve of the peaked, bossed saddle--"will the rice ripen to the touch of
the savage, clamoring monsoon?"

And he had drawn slightly away from her. He had not even kissed her,
though they were shielded from all the world by the folds of the great
battle flag that was stiff with gold, stiffer with darkening gore. In
the fluttering heart of Vasantasena rose a great longing for this
insolent warrior who spoke of love--and touched her not.

    _This is the tale of the grape that is never pressed, that never
    loses its sweetness, though white hands squeeze its pulp, day
    after day, night after night._

    _This is the tale of the book that is never read to the end,
    though eyes, moist and smarting with longing, read its pages
    till the candles gutter out in the gray dawn wind and the young
    sun sings its cosmic song out of the East, purple and golden._

    _This is the tale of love which rises like a mist of ineffable
    calm, then sweeps along on the red wings of eternal desire--the
    tale of love that is a chain forged of steel and scent, a chain
    of unbreakable steel mated to the pollen of the glistening
    areka-flower._

    _LET ALL THE WISE CHILDREN LISTEN TO MY JATAKA!_

"See!" said Shivadevi, the old nurse, to Vasantasena, who shimmered
among the green, silken cushions of her couch like a tiger-beetle in a
nest of fresh leaves. "Vikramavati, the king, has bowed low before you.
He has removed from your hands and ankles the pearl and gold fetters. He
has taken off your robe of mourning and has thrown about your shoulders
a sari woven of moonbeams and running water. He has seated you beside
him on the peacock throne, as a free woman--not a slave."

"Yes," replied Vasantasena. "He has placed his head and his heart on the
sill of the door of love. He brought me his soul as an offering. And
I"--she yawned--"I love him not."

"He has heaped your lap with many treasures," went on the old woman.
"Jasper from the Punjab has he brought to you, rubies from Burma,
turquoises from Thibet, star-sapphires and alexandrites from Ceylon,
flawless emeralds from Afghanistan, white crystal from Malwa, onyx from
Persia, amethyst from Tartary, green jade and white jade from Amoy,
garnets from Bundelkhand, red corals from Socotra, chalcedon from Syria,
malachite from Kafiristan, pearls from Ramesvaram, lapis lazuli from
Jaffra, yellow diamonds from Poonah, black agate from Dynbhulpoor!"

Vasantasena shrugged her slim shoulders disdainfully.

"Yes," she said. "He put the nightingale in a cage of gold and
exclaimed: 'Behold, this is thy native land!' Then he opened the
door--and the nightingale flew away to the green land, the free land,
never regretting the golden cage."

"He grovels before you in the dust of humility. He says that his life is
a blackened crucible of sin and vanity and regret, but that his love
for you is the golden bead at the bottom of the crucible. He has given
you freedom. He has given you friendship. He has given you tenderness
and affection and respect."

"Yes," smiled Vasantasena. "He has given me his everything, his all.
Without cavil, without stint. Freedom he has given me, keeping the
bitter water of humility as his own portion. But all his generosity, his
fairness, his humility, his decency--all his love has not opened the
inner door to the shrine of my heart. In the night he comes, with the
flaming torches of his passion; but my heart is as cold as clay, as cold
as freezing water when the snow wind booms down from the Himalayas. The
madness of the storm and the waves is upon him, but there is no
answering surge in the tide of my soul. In my heart he sees the world
golden and white and flashing with laughter. In his heart I see the
world grim and drab and haggard and seamed with tears. For--generous,
fair, unstinting--he is also selfish and foolish, being a man unwise in
the tortuous, glorious ways of love. Daily he tells me that I am the
well of his love. But never does he ask me if his love is the stone of
my contentment."

"Perhaps he does not dare," cackled the old nurse.

"Being modest?"

"Yes."

"Only the selfish are modest, caring naught for the answering spark in
the heart of the loved one. And the love of woman is destroyed by humble
selfishness as the religion of a Brahmin by serving kings, the milk of a
cow by distant pasturage, and wealth by committing injustice. There is
no worth in such wealth--nor in such love. This is Veda-truth."

And in a high, proud voice she added:

"I love Madusadan, captain of horse. I will kiss his red, mocking lips
and bend to the thrill of his strong body. Pure he is to all the world,
to all women--so the bazaar gossip says--but I, and I alone, shall light
the lamp of passion in his heart. Free am I! But the unsung music in his
heart shall be a loved fetter around mine. Clasped in his arms, life and
death shall unite in me in an unbreakable chain.

"I will bury my hands deep in the savage, tangled forest that is his
soul and follow therein the many trails. I will read the message of his
hooded, brown eyes, the trembling message of his great, hairy hands. His
heart is a crimson malati-flower, and mine the tawny orchid spotted with
purple that winds around its roots."

"Gray is the hair on his temples. He is the king's senior by ten years."

"Years of wisdom," laughed Vasantasena. "Years of waiting. Years of
garnering strength."

"He is not as kindly as Vikramavati, nor as great, nor as generous."

"But he is wise--wise! He knows the heart of woman--the essence, the
innermost secret of woman."

"And that is--"

"Patience in achieving. Strength in holding. Wisdom in--_not_ demanding
unless the woman offers and gives sign."

And she went out into the garden that stretched back of the palace in
wild, scented profusion, bunching its majestic, columnar aisles of
banyan figs as a foil for the dainty, pale green tracery of the
nim-trees, the quivering, crimson domes of the peepals bearded to the
waist with gray and orange moss, where the little, bold-eye gekko
lizards slipped like narrow, green flags through the golden, perfumed
fretwork of the chandela bushes and wild parrots screeched overhead with
burnished wings; and there she met Madusadan, captain of horse, whom she
had summoned by a scribbled note earlier in the day, and her veil
slipped, and her white feet were like trembling flowers, and she pressed
her red mouth on his and rested in his arms like a tired child.

    _The road of desire runs beneath the feet all day and all night,
    says the tale. There is no beginning to this road, nor end. Out
    of the nowhere it comes, vanishing, yet never vanishing in the
    nowhere; renewing each morning, after nights of love, the
    eternal miracle, the never-ending virginity of passion._

    _You cannot end the endless chain of it, says the tale. You
    cannot hush the murmur of the sea which fills the air, rising
    to the white, beckoning finger of Chandra, the Moon._

    _Love's play is worship._

    _Love's achievement is a rite._

    _Love's secret is never read._

    _Always around the corner is another light, a new light--golden,
    twinkling, mocking, like the will-o'-the-wisp._

    _Reach to it--as you never will--and there is the end of the
    chain, the end of the tale._

    _LET ALL THE WISE CHILDREN LISTEN TO MY JATAKA!_

"You broke your faith, faithless woman!" said Vikramavati as he saw
Vasantasena in the arms of Madusadan, captain of horse.

The girl smiled.

"It was you who spoke of love," she replied, "not I."

"I tried to conquer your love by the greatness of my own love."

"As a fool tries to take out a thorn in his foot by a thorn in his
hand."

"I gave you freedom. I gave you the wealth of all Hindustan, the wealth
of the outer lands. I gave you my soul, my heart, my body, my strength,
my ambition, my faith, my secret self."

"You gave me everything--because you love me. I gave you
nothing--because I do not love you."

"Love can do the impossible," gravely said the captain of horse, while
Vasantasena nestled more closely to his arms. "It was because of love
that Vishnu, the Creator, changed into a dwarf and descended to the
lowermost regions, and there captured Bali, the Raja of Heaven and of
Earth. It was because of love that, as Ramachandra, helped by the monkey
folk, he built a bridge between India and Ceylon, and that, as Krishna,
he lifted up the great mountain Golonddhan in the palm of his hand as an
umbrella with which to shield his loved one against the splintering,
merciless rays of Surya, the Sun, the jealous, yellow god.

"Love can do all things--except one. For love can never create love,
wise king. Love can force the stream to flow up-hill, but it cannot
create the stream when there is no water."

Silence dropped like a shadow of fate, and Vikramavati turned slowly
and walked toward the palace.

"To-morrow," he said over his shoulder, in an even, passionless voice,
"you shall die a death of lingering agony."

Madusadan laughed lightly.

"There is neither to-day nor to-morrow nor yesterday for those who
love," he replied. "There is only the pigeon-blue of the sunlit sky, the
crimson and gold of the harvest-fields, the laughter of the far waters.
Love fills the cup of infinity."

"To-morrow you will be dead," the king repeated dully.

And again Madusadan laughed lightly.

"And what then, O wise king, trained in the rigid logic of Brahmin and
Parohitas?" he asked. "Will our death do away with the fact that once we
lived and, living, loved each other? Will the scarlet of our death wipe
out the streaked gray of your jealousy? Will our death give you the love
of Vasantasena, which never was yours in life? Will our death rob our
souls of the memory of the great sweetness which was ours, the beauty,
the glory, the never-ending thrill of fulfillment?"

"Love ceases with death."

"Love, wise king, is unswayed by the rhythm of either life--or death.
Love--that surges day after day, night after night, as year after year
the breast of the earth heaves to the spring song of the ripening rice,
to the golden fruit of the mango groves.

"Death? A fig for it, wise king!

"Let me but live until to-morrow in the arms of my loved one, and the
sweetness of our love shall be an unbreakable chain--on through a
thousand deaths, a thousand new births, straight into Nirvana--into
Brahm's silver soul!"

"Ahee!" echoed Vasantasena. "Let death come and the wind of life lull;
let the light fail and the flowers wilt and droop; let the stars gutter
out one by one and the cosmos crumble in the gray storm of final
oblivion--yet will our love be an unbreakable chain, defying you, O
king--defying the world--defying the very gods--"

"But not defying the laws of nature, as interpreted by a wise Brahmin!"
a shrill, age-cracked voice broke in, and Deo Singh, the old prime
minister who had come down the garden trail on silent, slippered feet,
stepped into the open.

"No! By Shiva and by Shiva! Not the laws of nature, the eternal laws of
logic, as interpreted by a priest well versed in Sruti and Smriti--in
revelation and tradition. Not the laws of nature, rational and
evidential, physical and metaphysical, analytical and synthetical,
philosophical, and philological, as expounded by a Parohita familiar
with the Vedas and the blessed wisdom of the ancient Upanishads of
Hind!"

He salaamed low before Vikramavati.

"It is written in the Bhagavad Gita, the Book of Books, the Lay of Brahm
the Lord, that each crime shall find condign punishment, be it committed
by high caste or low caste, by prince or peasant, by raja or ryot. To
each his punishment, says the Karma, which is fate!"

"And--these two?" demanded Vikramavati. "What punishment shall be meted
out to the faithless woman and the faithless captain of horse, Brahmin?"

Deo Singh spread out his fingers like the sticks of a fan.

"They have chosen their own sentence, these worshipers of Kartikeya, God
of Rogues and Rascals," he chuckled. "Of a chain they spoke. An
unbreakable chain that defies all laws, except belike"--again he laughed
deep in his throat--"the wise laws of nature. Weld them together with
such a chain, forged by a master smith, made so strong that not even a
tough-thewed captain of horse may break it with the clouting muscles of
his arms and back. A chain, ten feet long, so that they may never be far
away from each other, so that they may always be able to slake the hot,
turbulent thirst of love, so that they may never have to wait for the
thrill of fulfillment as a beggar waits at life's feast, so that day and
night, each hour, each minute, each second they may revel in the
sunshine of their love, so that never they may have to stand helpless
before the flood-tide of their desire.

"Grant them their wish, O king, being wise and merciful; and then lock
them into a room containing the choicest food, the sweetest drinks, the
whitest flowers, the softest, silkenest couch draped with purple and
gold. A room such as lovers dream of--and fools! Leave them there
together for three days, three nights, three sobbing, crunching, killing
eternities! With no sound, no touch, no scent, no taste, but their own
voices, their own hearts and souls and minds and bodies! And at the end
of the three days----"

"Yes?" asked Vikramavati.

"They will have suffered the worst punishment, the worst agony on earth.
Slowly, slowly for three days, three nights, three eternities, they will
have watched the honey of their love turn, drop by drop, into gall.
Their passion--slowly, slowly--will turn into loathing; their desire
into disgust. For no love in the world can survive the chain of
monotony!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Thus it was done.

A chain of unbreakable steel, ten feet long, was welded to the girl's
right wrist and the man's left, and they were locked into a house--a
house such as lovers dream of--that was guarded day and night by armed
warriors, who let none within hailing distance, whose windows were
shuttered and curtained so that not even the golden eye of the sun might
look in, and around which a vast circular clearing had been made with
torch and spade and scimitar so that neither bird nor insect nor beast
of forest and jungle might live there and no sound drift into the
lovers' room except, perhaps, the crooning sob of the dawn wind; and at
the end of the third night carefully, stealthily, silently the king and
the Brahmin walked up to the house and pressed their ears against the
keyhole, and they heard the man's voice saying:

"I love you, little flower of my happiness! I love you--you who are all
my dreams come true! When I look into your face the sun rises, and the
waters bring the call of the deep, and the boat of my life rocks on the
dancing waves of passion!"

And then the girl's answer, clear, serene:

"And I love _you_, Madusadan, captain of horse! You have broken the
fetters of my loneliness, the shackles of my longing! I waited, waited,
waited--but you came, and I shall never let you go again! You have
banished all the drab, sad dreams of the past! You have made your heart
a prison for my love, and you have tossed away the key into the
turbulent whirlpool of my eternal desire!"

    _"Did the chain gall them?" asked the Foolish Virgin, who had
    come to Jehan Tugluk Khan, a wise man in Tartary and milk
    brother to Ghengiz Khan, Emperor of the East and the North and
    Captain General of the Golden Horde._

    _"No, Foolish Virgin," replied Jehan Tugluk Khan. "Their love
    could not have lived without the chain. It was their love which
    WAS the chain--made it, held it, welded it, eternal, unbreaking,
    unbreakable. Ten feet long was the chain. Each foot of
    steel--eternal, unbreaking, unbreakable--was a link of their
    love, and these links were: Passion, patience, completion,
    friendship, tolerance, understanding, tenderness, forgiveness,
    service, humor."_

    _This is the end of the tale of Vasantasena, the slave who was
    free in her own heart, and of Madusadan, a captain of horse, who
    plucked the white rose without fearing the thorns._

    _And, says the tale, if you would make your chain doubly
    unbreakable, add another foot to it, another link. There is no
    word for it. But, by the strength and sense of it, you must
    never lull your love to sleep in the soft cradle of too great
    security._

    _For love demands eternal vigilance._

    _LISTEN, O AZZIA, O BELOVED, TO MY JATAKA!_




SECOND TALE

OUT OF THE DARK

BY MAX BRAND


The principality of Pornia is not a large country and in the ordinary
course of history it should have been swallowed entire, centuries ago,
by one of the kingdoms which surround it. Its situation has saved it
from this fate, for it is the buffer state between two great monarchies
whose jealousy has preserved for Pornia an independent existence.

Despite its independence, Pornia has never received much consideration
from the rest of Europe, and the aim of its princes for many generations
has been to foist it into the great councils by a strong alliance with
one of the two kingdoms to which it serves as a buffer.

The long-desired opportunity came at last in the reign of Alexander VI,
who, one morning, commanded Rudolph of Herzvina to appear at the palace.
As soon as the worthy old baron appeared, Alexander spoke to him as
follows: "Rudolph, you are an old and respected counselor, a devoted
servant of the State, and therefore I am delighted to announce that the
greatest honor is about to descend upon your family, an honor so great
that the entire State of Pornia will be elevated thereby. The Crown
Prince Charles wishes to make your daughter his wife!"

At this he stepped back, the better to note the joy with which old
Rudolph would receive this announcement, but, to his astonishment, the
baron merely bowed his head and sighed.

"Your highness," said Rudolph of Herzvina, "I have long known of the
attachment which the crown prince has for my daughter, Bertha, but I
fear that the marriage can never be consummated."

"Come, come!" said the prince genially. "It is a far leap indeed from
Baron of Herzvina to father-in-law to Prince Charles, but there have
been stranger things in history than this, though never anything that
could so effectually elevate Pornia. Have no fear of Charles. He loves
your daughter; he is strong-minded as the very devil; he will override
any opposition from his father. As a matter of fact, it is no secret
that Charles is already practically the ruler over his kingdom. So
rejoice, Herzvina, and I will rejoice with you!"

But the baron merely shook his head sadly and repeated: "I fear the
marriage can never be consummated."

"Why not?" said the prince in some heat. "I tell you, his royal highness
loves the girl. I could read passion even in the stilted language of his
ambassador's message. Why not?"

"I was not thinking of his royal highness, but of the girl. She will not
marry him."

The prince dropped into a chair with jarring suddenness.

Rudolph continued hastily: "I have talked with Bertha many times and
seriously of the matter; I have tried to convince her of her duty; but
she will not hear me. The foolish girl says she does not love his
highness."

The prince smote his hands together in an ecstasy of impatience.

"Love! Love! In the name of God, Herzvina, what has love to do with
this? This is the thing for which Pornia has waited during centuries.
Through this alliance I can make a treaty that will place Pornia once
and forever upon the map of the diplomatic powers. Love!"

"I have said all this to her, but she is obdurate."

"Does she expect some fairy prince? She is not a child; she is not
even--forgive me--beautiful."

"True. She is not even pretty, but even homely women, your highness,
will sometimes think of love. It is a weakness of the sex."

He was not satirical; he was very earnest indeed. He continued: "I have
tried every persuasion. She only says in reply: 'He is too old. I cannot
love him.'"

An inspiration came to Alexander of Pornia. Under the stress of it he
rose and so far forgot himself as to clap a hand upon the shoulder of
Herzvina. In so doing he had to reach up almost as high as his head, for
the princes of Pornia have been small men, time out of mind.

"Baron," he said, "will you let me try my hand at persuasion?"

"It would be an honor, sire. My family is ever at the disposal of my
prince."

He answered with a touch of emotion: "I know it, Rudolph; but will you
trust the girl in my hands for a number of days? A thought has come to
me. I know I can convince her that this love of which she dreams is a
thing of the flesh alone, a physical necessity. Come, send her to me,
and I shall tear away her illusions. She will not thank me for it, but
she will marry the crown prince."

"I will send her to the palace to-day."

"Very good; and first tell her why I wish to speak with her. It may be
that of herself she will change her mind when she learns the wishes of
her prince. Farewell."

And the prince rode off to a review of the troops of the city guard. So
it was that Bertha of Herzvina sat for a long time in a lonely room,
after her arrival at the palace before the door opened, a man in livery
bowed for the entrance of the prince, and she found herself alone with
her sovereign.

Automatically she curtsied, and he let her remain bowed while he slowly
drew off his white gloves. He still wore his general's uniform with the
stiff padding which would not allow his body to grow old, for a prince
of Pornia must always look the soldier.

"Sit down," he ordered, and as she obeyed he commenced to walk the room.

He never sat quietly through an interview if he could avoid it; a
constitutional weakness of the nerves made it almost impossible for him
to meet another person's eyes. The pacing up and down gave a plausible
reason for the continual shifting of his glance.

"A good day, a very good day," he said. "The hussars were wonderful."

His shoulders strained further back. The prince himself always rode at
the head of the hussars; in her childhood she had admired him. He
stopped at a window and hummed a marching air. That was a planned
maneuver, for his back was far more royal than his face, with its tall
forehead and diminutive mouth and chin. She felt as if she were in the
presence of a uniformed automaton.

He broke off his humming and spoke without turning.

"Well?"

"My decision is unchanged."

"Impossible! In the length of a whole day even a woman must think
twice."

"Yes, many times."

"You will not marry him?"

"I cannot love him."

He whirled, and the pale blue eyes flashed at her a brief glance which
made her cringe. It was as if an X-ray had been turned on her heart.

"Love!" he said softly, and she shuddered again. "Because he is old?
Bertha, you are no longer a child. Other women marry for what they may
term love. It is your privilege to marry for the State. That is the
nobler thing."

He smiled and nodded, repeating for his own ear: "The nobler thing! What
is greater than such service--what is more glorious than to forget self
and marry for the good of the thousands?"

"I have an obligation to myself."

"Who has filled you with so many childish ideas?"

"They have grown of themselves, sire."

The pacing up and down the room recommenced. "Child, have you no desire
to serve me? I mean, your country?"

She answered slowly, as if feeling for her words: "It is impossible that
I should be able to serve you through my dishonor. If I should marry
the crown prince, my life would be one long sleep, sire. I would not
dare awaken to the reality."

His head tilted and he laughed noiselessly. A weakness of the throat
prevented him from raising his voice even in times of the greatest
excitement.

"A soul that sleeps, eh? The kiss of love will awaken it?"

He surveyed her with brief disdain.

"My dear, you scorn titles, and yet as an untitled woman you are not a
match for the first red-faced tradesman's daughter. Stand up!"

She rose and he led her in front of a pier glass. Solemnly he studied
her pale image.

"A sleeping soul!" he repeated.

She covered her face.

"Will that bait catch the errant lover, Bertha?"

"God will make up the difference."

He cursed softly. She had not known he could be so moved.

"Poor child, let me talk with you."

He led her back to a chair almost with kindness and sat somewhat behind
her so that he need not meet her eyes.

"This love you wait for--it is not a full-grown god, dear girl, but a
blind child. Given a man and a woman and a certain propinquity, and
nature does the rest. We put a mask on nature and call it love, we name
an abstraction and call it God. Love! Love! Love! It is a pretty
disguise--no more. Do you understand?"

"I will not."

She listened to his quick breathing.

"Bertha, if I were to chain you with a ten-foot chain to the first man
off the streets and leave you alone with him for three days, what would
happen?"

Her hand closed on the arm of the chair. He rose and paced the room as
his idea grew.

"Your eyes would criticize him and your shame would fight in behalf of
your--soul? And the sight of your shame would keep the man in check. But
suppose the room were dark--suppose you could not see his face and
merely knew that a man was there--suppose _he_ could not see and merely
knew that a woman was there? What would happen? Would it be love? Pah!
Love is no more deified than hunger. If it is satisfied, it goes to
sleep; if it is satiated, it turns to loathing. Aye, at the end of the
three days you would be glad enough to have the ten-foot chain cut. But
first what would happen?"

The vague terror grew coldly in her, for she could see the idea taking
hold of him like a hand.

"If I were to do this, the world might term it a shameful thing, but I
act for Pornia--not for myself. I consider only the good of the State.
By this experiment I prove to you that love is not God, but blind
nature. Yes, and if you knew it as it is, would you oppose me longer?
The thought grows upon me! Speak!"

Her smile made her almost beautiful.

"Sire, in all the world there is only one man for every woman."

"Book talk."

He set his teeth because he could not meet her eyes.

"And who will bring you this one man?"

"God."

Once more the soundless laugh.

"Then I shall play the part of God. Bertha, you must now make your
decision: a marriage for the good of the State, or the ten-foot chain,
the dark room--and love!"

"Even you will not dare this, sire."

"Bertha, there is nothing I do not dare. What would be known? I give
orders that this room be utterly darkened; I send secret police to seize
a man from the city at random and fetter him to a chain in that room;
then I bring you to the room and fasten you to the other end of the
chain, and for three days I have food introduced into the room. Results?
For the man, death; for you, a knowledge first of yourself and,
secondly, of love. The State will benefit."

"It is bestial--incredible."

"Bestial? Tut! I play the part of God and even surpass Him. I put you
face to face with a temptation through which you shall come to know
yourself. You lose a dream; you gain a fact. It is well. Shame will
guard the secret in your heart--and the State will benefit. Still you
see that I am paternal--merciful. I do not punish you for your past
obstinacy. I still give you a choice. Bertha, will you marry as I wish,
or will you force me to play the part of God?"

"I shall not marry."

"Ah, you will wait for God to make up the difference. It is well--very
well; _le Dieu c'est moi_. Ha! That is greater than the phrase of Louis
XIV. You shall have still more time, but the moment the sun goes down,
if I do not hear from you, I shall ring a bell that will send my secret
police out to seize a man indiscriminately from the masses of the city.
I shall not even stipulate that he be young. My trust in nature
is--absolute. _Adieu!_"

She made up her mind the moment he left the room. She drew on her cloak.
Before the pier glass she paused.

"Aye," she murmured, "I could not match the first farmer's daughter. But
still there must be one man in the world--and God will make up the
difference!"

She threw open the door which gave on a passage leading to a side
entrance. A grenadier of the palace guard jumped to attention and
presented arms.

"Pardon," he said.

He completely blocked the hall; the prince had left nothing to chance.
She started to turn back and then hesitated and regarded the man
carefully.

"Fritz!" she said at last, for she recognized the peasant who had been a
stable-boy on her father's estate before he took service in the
grenadiers. "You are Fritz Barr!"

He flushed with pleasure.

"_Madame_ remembers me?"

"And my little black pony you used to take care of?"

"Yes, yes!"

He grinned and nodded; and then she noted a revolver in the holster at
his side.

"What are your orders, Fritz?"

"To let no one pass down this hall. I am sorry, _madame_."

"But if I were to ask you for your revolver?"

He stirred uneasily and she took money from her purse and gave it to
him.

"With this you could procure another weapon?"

He drew a long breath; the temptation was great.

"I could, _madame_."

"Then do so. It will never be known from whom I received the gun--and my
need is desperate--desperate!"

He unbuckled the weapon without a word, and with it in her hand she
returned to the room.

There was a tall western window, and before this she drew up a chair to
watch the setting of the sun.

"Will he ring the bell when the edge of the sun touches the hills or
when it is completely set?" she thought.

The white circle grew yellow; then it took on a taint of orange, bulging
oddly at the sides into a clumsy oval. From the gardens below came a
stir of voices and then the thrill of a girl's laughter. She smiled as
she listened, and, leaning from the window, the west wind blew to her
the scent of flowers. She sat there for a long time, breathing deeply of
the fragrance and noting all the curves of the lawn with a still, sad
pleasure. The green changed from bright to dark; when she looked up the
sun had set.

As she turned from the gay western sky, the room was doubly dim and the
breeze of the evening set the curtains rustling and whispering. Silence
she was prepared for, but not those ghostly voices, not the shift and
sweep of the shadows. She turned the electric switch, closing her eyes
to blur the shock of the sudden deluge of light. The switch clicked, but
when she opened her eyes the room was still dark; they had cut the
connecting wires.

Thereafter her mind went mercifully blank, for what she faced was, like
birth and death, beyond comprehension. Noise at the windows roused her
from the daze at last and she found that a number of workmen were
sealing the room so that neither light nor sound could enter or escape.
The only air would be from the ventilator. And still she could not
realize what had happened, what was to happen, until the last sounds of
the workmen ceased and the deep, dread silence began; silence that had a
pulse in it--the beating of her heart.

She was standing in the middle of the room when the first shapes formed
in the black night, and terror hovered about her suddenly, touching her
as with cold fingers. She felt her way back to a corner and crouched
there against the wall, waiting, waiting. They had seized the doomed
man long before this. They must have bound and gagged him and carried
him to the palace.

A thousand types of men passed before her inward eye--thin-faced clerks,
men as pale as the belly of a dead fish; bearded monsters, gross and
thick-lipped, with thunderous laughter; laborers, stamped with patient
weariness--and all whom she saw carried the sign of the beast in their
eyes. She tried to pray, but the voice of the prince rang in her ears:
"_Le Dieu, c'est moi!_" and when she named God in her prayers, she
visualized Alexander's face, the pale, small eyes, the colorless hair,
the lofty brow, the mouth whose tight lips could not be disguised by
even the careful mustache. When a key turned in a door, she sprang to
her feet with a cry of horror.

"It is I," said the prince.

"I am dying; I cannot stay here; I will marry whom and when you will."

"Ah, my dear, you should have spoken before sunset. I warned you, and I
never change my mind. It is only for three days, remember. Also, it is
in the interest of science. Beyond that, I have quite taken a fancy to
playing God for you for three days. Do you understand?"

The even, mocking tones guided her to him. She fell at his feet and
strained his thin knees against her breast.

"Come! Be reasonable, Bertha. This is justice."

"Sire, I want no justice. For God's sake, be merciful."

She heard the shaken breath of his soundless laughter.

"Is it so? You should be grateful to me. Trust me, child, I am bringing
you the love of which you have dreamed. Ha! Ha! _Le Dieu, c'est moi!_"

The clanking of the chain which he carried stilled her voice. It hushed
even the thunder of her heart. She rose and waited patiently while the
manacle was affixed to her wrist. The prince crossed the room and tapped
on the door, which opened, and by a faint light from without Bertha
discovered two men carrying a third into the room. She strained her
eyes, but could make out no faces. The burden was laid on the floor; a
metallic sound told her that she was fettered to the unknown.

The prince said: "You are a brave girl. All may yet be well. Then human
nature is finer than I think. We shall see. As for your lover, your gift
from God, he is sleeping soundly now. It may be an hour before the
effects of the drug wear away. During that time you can think of love.
Food will be placed three times a day within the door yonder. You can
readily find it by feeling your way around the wall. Farewell."

When the door closed she started to retreat to her corner, but the chain
instantly drew taut with a rattle. Strangely enough, much of her fear
left her now that she was face to face with the danger; temptation, the
prince had called it. She smiled as she remembered. When the man awoke
and learned their situation, she had no doubt as to how he would act.
She had seen the sign of the beast in the eyes of many men, great and
small; she had seen it and understood. The revolver might save her for a
time, but what if she slept? She knew it would be almost impossible to
remain awake during three days and nights.

The moment her eyes closed the end would come. It seemed better that she
should fire the bullet now.

When he recovered his senses, it would be difficult to shoot effectively
in the dark, for this was not the gloom of night--it was an absolute
void, black, thick, impenetrable. She could not make out her hand at the
slightest distance from her eyes. He might even attack her from behind
and knock the revolver from her hand before she could shoot. Sooner or
later the man must die. Even if she did not kill him it would be
accomplished by the command of the prince at the end of the three days.

Far better that it should be done at once--that he should never awaken
from his sleep. She reached the decision calmly and crept forward to
him. Very lightly she passed her hand over his clothes. She had to move
his arm to uncover the breast over his heart; the arm was a limp weight,
but the muscles were firm, round, and solid. The first qualm troubled
her as she realized that this must be a young man, at least a man in the
prime of his physical strength.

Then it occurred to her that often bullets fired into the breast are
deflected from the heart by bones; it would be far more certain to lay
the muzzle against the temple--press the trigger--the soul would depart.

The soul! She paused with a thrill of wonder. A little touch would loose
the swift spirit. The soul! For the first time she saw the tragedy from
the viewpoint of the unknown man. His life was cut in the middle; truly
a blind fate had reached out and chosen him from a whole city. Yet she
was merely hastening the inevitable. She reached out and found his
forehead.

It was broad and high. Tracing it lightly with the tips of her fingers
she discovered two rather prominent lumps of bony structure over the
eyes. Some one had told her that this represented a strong power of
memory. She tried to visualize that feature alone, and very suddenly, as
a face shows when a man lights his cigarette on the street at night, she
saw in memory the figure of Rembrandt's "Portrait of a Young Painter."
He sits at his drawing board, his pencil poised, ready for the stroke
which shall give vital character to his sketch. There is only one high
light, falling on the lower part of the face. Inspiration has tightened
the sensitive mouth; the questing eyes peer out from the shadow of the
soft cap. She broke off from her vision to realize with a start that
when she touched the trigger she would be stepping back through the
centuries and killing her dream of the original of Rembrandt's picture.
A foolish fancy, truly, but in the dark a dream may be as true, as vivid
as reality.

The unconscious man sighed. She leaned close and listened to his
breathing, soft, hurried, irregular as if he struggled in his sleep, as
if the subconscious mind were calling to the conscious: "Awake! Death is
here!"

At least there was plenty of time. She need not fire the shot until he
moved. She laid the revolver on her lap and absently allowed her hands
to wander over his face, lingering lightly on each feature. She grew
more alert after a moment. Every particle of her energy was concentrated
on seeing that face--on seeing it through her sense of touch. The blind,
she knew, grow so dextrous that the delicate nerves of their finger tips
record faces almost as accurately as the eyes of the normal person.

Ah, for one moment of that power! She tried her best. The nose, she told
herself, was straight and well modeled. The eyes, for she traced the
bony structure around them, must be large; the cheek bones high, a sign
of strength; the chin certainly square and prominent; the lips full and
the mouth rather large; the hair waving and thick; the throat large. One
by one she traced each detail and then, moving both hands rather swiftly
over the face, she strove to build the mental picture of the whole--and
she achieved one, but still it was always the young painter whom great
Rembrandt had drawn. The illusion would not go out of her mind.

An artist's hands, it is said, must be strong and sinewy. She took these
hands and felt the heavy bones of the wrist and strove to estimate the
length of the fingers. It seemed to her that this was an ideal hand for
a painter--it must be both strong and supple.

He sighed again and stirred; she caught up the weapon with feverish
haste and poised it.

"Ah, it is well," said the sleeper in his dream.

She made sure that he was indeed unconscious and then leaned low,
whispering: "Adieu, my dear."

At some happy vision he laughed softly. His breath touched her face.
Surely he could never know; he had so short a moment left for living;
perhaps this would pass into his latest dream on earth and make it
happy.

"Adieu!" she whispered again, and her lips pressed on his.

She laid the muzzle of the revolver against his temple, and, summoning
all her will power, she pressed the trigger. It seemed as if she were
pulling against it with her full strength, and yet there was no report.
Then she realized that all her might was going into an inward struggle.
She summoned to her aid the voice of the prince as he had said: "We put
a mask on nature and call it love; we name an abstraction and call it
God. _Le Dieu, c'est moi!_" She placed the revolver against the temple
of the sleeper; he stirred and disturbed the surety of her direction.
She adjusted the weapon again.

Up sprang the man, shouting: "Treason! Help!"

Then he stood silent a long moment; perhaps he was rehearsing the scene
of his seizure.

"This is death," he muttered at last, "and I am in hell. I have always
known what it would be--dark--utter and bitter loss of light."

As his hand moved, the chain rattled. He sprang back with such violence
that his lunging weight jerked her to her feet.

"It is useless to struggle," she cried.

"A woman! Where am I?"

"You are lost."

"But what has happened? In God's name, _madame_, are we chained
together?"

"We are."

"By whose power? By whose right and command?"

"By one against whom we cannot appeal."

"My crime?"

"None."

"For how long--"

"Three days."

He heaved a great sigh of relief.

"It is merely some practical joke, I see. That infernal Franz, I knew he
was meditating mischief! Three days--and then free?"

"Yes, for then you die."

Once more he was silent.

Then: "This is a hideous dream. I will waken from it at once--at once.
My dear lady--"

She heard him advancing.

"Keep the chain taut, sir, I am armed; I will fire at the slightest
provocation."

He stopped and laughed.

"Come, come! This is not so bad. You have been smiling in your sleep at
me. Up with the lights, my dear. If Franz has engaged you for this
business, let me tell you that I'm a far better fellow than he must have
advertised me. But what a devil he is to rig up such an elaborate hoax!
By Jove, this chain--this darkness--it's enough to turn a fellow's hair
white! The black night gets on my nerves. Lights! Lights! I yearn to see
you; I prophesy your beauty by your voice! Still coy? Then we'll try
persuasion!"

His breast struck the muzzle of the revolver.

She said quietly: "If I move my finger a fraction of an inch you die,
sir. And every word I have spoken to you is the truth."

"Well, well! You do this finely. I shall compliment Franz on rehearsing
you so thoroughly. Is this the fair Daphne of whom he told me--"

And his hand touched her shoulder.

"By everything that is sacred, I will fire unless you stand back--back
to the end of the chain."

"Is it possible? The Middle Ages have returned!"

He moved back until the light chain was taut.

"My mind whirls. I try to laugh, but your voice convinces me. _Madame_,
will you explain my situation in words of one syllable?"

"I have explained it already. You are imprisoned in a place from which
you cannot escape. You will be confined here, held to me by this chain,
for three days. At the end of that time you die."

"Will you swear this is the truth?"

"Name any oath and I will repeat it."

"There's no need," he said. "No, it cannot be a jest. Franz would never
risk the use of a drug, wild as he is. Some other power has taken me.
What reason lies behind my arrest?"

"Think of it as a blind and brutal hand which required a victim and
reached out over the city to find one. The hand fell upon you. There is
no more to say. You can only resign yourself to die an unknown death."

He said at last: "Not unknown, thank God. I have something which will
live after me."

Her heart leaped, for she was seeing once more the artist from
Rembrandt's brush.

"Yes, your paintings will not be forgotten."

"I feel that they will not, and the name of--"

"Do not speak of it!"

"Why?"

"I must not hear your name."

"But you know it already. You spoke of my painting."

"I have never seen your face; I have never heard your name; you were
brought to me in this room darkened as you find it now."

"Yet you knew--"

Her voice was marvelously low: "I touched your face, sir, and in some
way I knew."

After a time he said: "I believe you. This miracle is no greater than
the others. But why do you not wish to know my name?"

"I may live after you, and when I see your pictures I do not wish to
say: 'This is his work; this is his power; this is his limitation.' Can
you understand?"

"I will try to."

"I sat beside you while you were unconscious, and I pictured your face
and your mind for myself. I will not have that picture reduced to
reality."

"It is a delicate fancy. You are blind? You see by the touch of your
hands?"

"I am not blind, but I think I have seen your face through the touch."

"Here! I have stumbled against two chairs. Let us sit down and talk. I
will slide this chair farther away if you wish. Do you fear me?"

"No, I think I am not afraid. I am only very sad for you. Listen: I have
laid down the revolver. Is that rash?"

"_Madame_, my life has been clean. Would I stain it now? No, no! Sit
here--so! My hand touches yours--you are not afraid?--and a thrill leaps
through me. Is it the dark that changes all things and gives eyes to
your imagination, or are you really very beautiful?"

"How shall I say?"

"Be very frank, for I am a dying man, am I not? And I should hear the
truth."

"You are a profound lover of the beautiful?"

"I am a painter, _madame_."

She called up the image of her face--the dingy brown hair, long and
silken, to be sure; the colorless, small eyes; the common features which
the first red-skinned farmer's daughter could overmatch.

"Describe me as you imagine me. I will tell you when you are wrong."

"May I touch you, _madame_, as you touched me? Or would that trouble
you?"

She hesitated, but it seemed to her that the questing eyes of
Rembrandt's portrait looked upon her through the dark--eyes reverent and
eager at once.

She said: "You may do as you will."

His unmanacled hand went up, found her hair, passed slowly over its
folds.

"It is like silk to the touch, but far more delicate, for there is life
in every thread of it. It is abundant and long. Ah, it must shine when
the sun strikes upon it! It is golden hair, _madame_, no pale-yellow
like sea-sand, but glorious gold, and when it hangs across the
whiteness of your throat and bosom the hearts of men stir. Speak! Tell
me I have named it!"

She waited till the sob grew smaller in her throat.

"Yes, it is golden hair," she said.

"I could not be wrong."

His hand passed down her face, fluttering lightly, and she sensed the
eagerness of every touch. Cold fear took hold of her lest those
searching fingers should discover the truth.

"Your eyes are blue. Yes, yes! Deep-blue for golden hair. It cannot be
otherwise. Speak."

"God help me!"

"_Madame?_"

"I have been too vain of my eyes, sir. Yes, they are blue."

The fingers were on her cheeks, trembling on her lips, touching chin and
throat.

"You are divine. It was foredoomed that this should be! Yes, my life has
been one long succession of miracles, but the greatest was reserved
until the end. I have followed my heart through the world in search of
perfect beauty and now I am about to die, I find it. Oh, God! For one
moment with canvas, brush, and the blessed light of the sun! It cannot
be! No miracle is complete; but I carry out into the eternal night one
perfect picture. Canvas and paint? No, no! Your picture must be drawn in
the soul and colored with love. The last miracle and the greatest! Three
days? No, three ages, three centuries of happiness, for are you not
here?"

Who will say that there is not an eye with which we pierce the night? To
each of these two sitting in the utter dark there came a vision.
Imagination became more real than reality. He saw his ideal of the
woman, that picture which every man carries in his heart to think of in
the times of silence, to see in every void. And she saw her ideal of
manly power. The dark pressed them together as if with the force of
physical hands. For a moment they waited, and in that moment each knew
the heart of the other, for in that utter void of light and sound, they
saw with the eyes of the soul and they heard the music of the spheres.

Then she seemed to hear the voice of the prince: "You should be grateful
to me. Trust me, child, I am bringing you that love of which you
dreamed. _Le Dieu, c'est moi!_"

Yes, it was the voice of doom which had spoken from those sardonic lips.
The dark which annihilates time made their love a century old.

"In all the world," she whispered, "there is one man for every woman. It
is the hand of Heaven which gives me to you."

"Come closer--so! And here I have your head beside mine as God
foredoomed. Listen! I have power to look through the dark and to see
your eyes--how blue they are!--and to read your soul beneath them. We
have scarcely spoken a hundred words and yet I see it all. Through a
thousand centuries our souls have been born a thousand times and in
every life we have met, and known--"

And through the utter dark, the merciful dark, the deep, strong music of
his voice went on, and she listened, and forgot the truth and closed her
eyes against herself.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the night which closed the third day the prince approached the door
of the sealed room. To the officer of the secret police, who stood on
guard, he said: "Nothing has been heard."

"Early this afternoon there were two shots, I think."

"Nonsense. There are carpenters doing repair work on the floor above.
You mistook the noise of their hammers."

He waved the man away, and as he fitted the key into the lock he was
laughing softly to himself: "Now for the revelation, the downward head,
the shame. Ha! Ha! Ha!"

He opened the door and flashed on his electric lantern. They lay upon a
couch wrapped in each other's arms. He had shot her through the heart
and then turned the weapon on himself; his last effort must have been to
draw her closer. About them was wrapped the chain, idle and loose.
Surely death had no sting for them and the grave no victory, for the
cold features were so illumined that the prince could hardly believe
them dead.

He turned the electric torch on the painter. He was a man about fifty,
with long, iron-gray hair, and a stubble of three days' growth covering
his face. It was a singularly ugly countenance, strong, but savagely
lined, and the forehead corrugated with the wrinkles of long, mental
labor. But death had made Bertha beautiful. Her eyes under the shadow
of her lashes, seemed a deep-sea blue, and her loose, brown hair,
falling across the white throat and breast, seemed almost golden under
the light of the torch. A draft from the open door moved the hair and
the heart of the prince stirred in him.

He strove to loosen the arms of the painter, but they were frozen stiff
by death.

"She was a fool, and the loss is small," sighed the prince. "After all,
perhaps God was nearer than I thought. I bound them together with a
chain. He saw my act and must have approved, for see! He has locked them
together forever. Well, after all--_le Dieu, c'est moi!_"




THIRD TALE

PLUMB NAUSEATED

BY E. K. MEANS


I.

"Yes, suh, I feels plum' qualified to take on a wife."

The black negro blushed to a darker hue and his face shone like polished
ebony in the blazing August sun. In his embarrassment he twisted his
shapeless wool hat into a wad, thrust it under his arm like a bundle,
turned his back upon the white man's quizzical eyes, and sat down upon
the lowest step of the porch.

At the feet of the white man lay half a dozen pairs of handcuffs. He
stooped and picked up a pair which showed rusty in the bright light,
rubbed the rust off with sand-paper, squirted some oil into the
mechanism from a little can, and busied himself for a few minutes seeing
that his police hardware was in good condition.

The sheriff remained silent for so long that the negro imagined he had
been forgotten. Then Flournoy fired a question so unexpectedly that the
black man winced: "What's your name?"

"Dey calls me Plaster Sickety."

"Gosh!" the sheriff exploded. "Can any woman be induced to exchange a
perfectly decent name for a smear like that?"

"Suttinly," the negro grinned. "Dat gal's name ain't so awful cute. Dey
calls her Pearline Flunder."

"Plaster Sickety and Pearline Flunder--help, everybody! What sort of
children will issue from a matrimonial alliance of such names?"

"I reckin our chillun will all be borned Huns, Marse John; but I cain't
he'p it."

Under his manipulation the sheriff's worn handcuffs took on a polish
like new. At intervals he glanced up from his task to see the sunlight
spraying from the pecan-trees like water and the heat rising from the
ground, visible as a boiling cloud. Once he heard an eagle scream, and
glanced toward the Little Mocassin swamp to behold a black speck sail
into the haze that hung like a curtain of purple and gold upon the
horizon. The negro sat motionless except for glowing black eyes
restless as mercury and all-perceiving.

Suddenly the bear-trap mouth of the big sheriff twisted into a little
smile.

"How'd you like to give your girl one of these things for a
wedding-present, Plaster?" he asked, as he tossed a polished pair of
handcuffs on the step beside the negro.

"I's kinder pestered in my mind 'bout gittin' a fitten weddin'-present,
Marse John, but--" Plaster rose to his feet and returned the manacles
without completing his sentence.

"How much money have you got?" Flournoy asked.

"I ain't got none till yit."

"How you going to buy the license? How you going to pay the preacher?"
Flournoy asked.

"Dat's whut I come to git a view from you about, Marse John. All de
cullud folks gives you a rep dat you is powerful good to niggers an' I
figgered dat you an' me mought fix up some kind of shake-down so I could
git married 'thout costin' me nothin'."

"Don't you ever read the Bible?" Flournoy growled. "Even Adam's wife
cost him a bone."

"Yes, suh," the negro grinned. "But I figger ef Sheriff Flournoy had
been aroun' anywheres at dat time, maybe Adam would 'a' got off a whole
lot cheaper."

"Have you got a job to support your wife?" Flournoy asked.

"Naw, suh."

"Have you got a house to live in?"

"Naw, suh."

"Where are you going to live with her--in a hollow sycamore-tree?"

"Yes, suh, I reckin so--dat is, excusin' ef you don't he'p us none."

"Where are you two idiots going to derive your sustenance--from the
circumambient atmosphere?"

"Dat's de word, Marse John--dat is, excusin' ef you don't loant us a
hand in our troubles," the negro murmured, wondering what the sheriff's
big talk meant.

"Do you love this black girl very much?" the sheriff asked with that odd
turn of tone with which every man speaks of love when he is in love with
love.

"Boss," the black man answered in a voice which throbbed, "I been lovin'
dat gal ever since she warn't no bigger dan--dan--dan a June-bug whut
had visited accidental a woodpecker prayer-meetin'."

"Is she good to look at, Plaster?" Flournoy smiled.

"Well, suh, I cain't lie to no white man, Marse John; an' I tells you
honest--she looks a whole heap better at night in de dark of de moon."

"If she ain't a good-looker, why do you love her?" Flournoy asked
without a smile.

"She's good sense an' jedgment, Marse John," the black man answered
earnestly. "An'--an'--I jes' nachelly loves her."

Flournoy studied a moment, twisting a pair of steel handcuffs in his
giant hands. Finally he spoke:

"Plaster, I have a cabin down on the Coolie Bayou which I have given to
three young married couples in succession on the condition that they
live there in peace and amity one year."

"Yes, suh."

"Every couple broke up and got a divorce within nine months."

"Too bad, Marse John, dat's mighty po' luck."

"You niggers think you love each other until you get hitched and then
you don't stay hitched."

"Some shorely don't--dey don't fer a fack."

"Now I make you and Pearline Flunder this offer. I will buy your
marriage license, pay Vinegar Atts to marry you, bear all the expense of
a church wedding, give you a job so you can support your wife, and I
will make you a present of that cabin down on the Coolie Bayou if you
and your wife will live together for three days without busting up in a
row."

"Three days, Marse John!" the negro howled. "Boss, I motions to make it
thurty years!"

"No!" Flournoy snapped. "Three days!"

"I's willin', Marse John," the negro laughed, cutting a caper on the
grass.

"All right!" the sheriff said as he stooped and picked up a pair of
handcuffs. "Now listen: I intend to cut the little chain on these two
manacles and attach each cuff to a ten-foot chain. When you and Pearline
are married, I am going to put one of these manacles around her wrist
and one around your wrist"--the negro showed the whites of his
eyes--"and bind you two honey-loves together with a ten-foot chain."
The negro looked behind him toward the gate and the public highway, took
a tighter grip upon his hat, and made a furtive step backward. "You are
to remain bound together for three days." The negro smiled and stepped
forward. "At the end of that time you are to come here and report, and
if you agree to spend the remainder of your life together, the cabin is
yours!"

"Make it a two-feets chain, Marse John, so us kin git clost to each
yuther," Plaster pleaded.

"What I have spoken I have spoken," Flournoy proclaimed autocratically.
"Now, go tell your sweetheart all about it."


II.

The Big Four of Tickfall sat around a much bewhittled pine table in the
Hen-Scratch saloon. The room was hazy with their tobacco smoke.
Conversation languished. The session was about to adjourn until
to-morrow at the same hour. Figger Bush laid his cigarette upon the edge
of the table, lifted his head like a dog baying the moon, and chanted:

    "O you muss be a lover of de landlady's daughter
    Or you cain't git a secont piece of pie!"

Before the other could catch the tune, the green-baize doors of the
saloon were thrown open and a white man entered. Every negro looked up
into that granite face with its deep-set eyes, iron jaw, and rugged
lines of strength and purpose, and smiled a joyful welcome:

"Mawnin', Marse John. 'Tain't no use to come sheriffin' down dis way. No
niggers ain't done nothin'."

"I am hunting for a Methodist clergyman of color," Flournoy grinned.

"Boss," Vinegar Atts chuckled as he rose to his feet, "I's de blackest
an' best nigger preacher whut is, an' I b'lieves in de Mefdis doctrine
of fallin' from grace an' grease. Ef you misdoubts my words, ax my wife.
Dat ole woman admits dat fack herse'f."

"I want you to perform a wedding ceremony at the Shoofly Church to-night
at seven o'clock," the sheriff announced.

Instantly the Rev. Vinegar Atts thrust both hands into the pockets of
his trousers and brought his hands out, turning out the pockets and
showing them empty.

"Dar now, Figger Bush!" Vinegar bellowed. "I tole you dat de good Lawd
would pervide a way fer me to pay fer dem near-booze grape-juices I been
guzzlin' in yo' sinful saloom! Five dollars will sottle wid you an'
leave a few change over fer seegaws."

"Who's cormittin' mattermony, Marse John?" Mustard Prophet wanted to
know. "Is it one of dese here shotgun weddin's?"

"Plaster Sickety wishes to wed Pearline Flunder."

"I knows 'em," Hitch Diamond rumbled from his big chest. "De good Lawd
will shore got to pervide fer dem coons like He do fer Vinegar
Atts--nary one is got git-up enough to make a livin'."

"Those young colored honey-birds are under my special care and
protection," Flournoy announced, smiling. "I intend to house them and
take care of them and get them work. They are an experiment."

"De trouble wid experiments is dis, Marse John," Mustard chuckled,
"sometimes dey bust in yo' face."

"My plan is this," Flournoy told them. "I am going to tie those two
negroes together with a ten-foot chain and they are to live in peace and
amity for three days."

"Lawdymussy, Marse John!" the Rev. Vinegar Atts bellowed. "Did you ever
tie two cats to each yuther an' hang 'em over de limb of a tree?"

"Yes."

"Does you recommember how quick dem cats got tired of each yuther's
sawsiety an' fell out wid theirselves?"

"Certainly."

Vinegar jerked a yellow bandana handkerchief from the tail of his coat
and mopped the top of his bald head.

"You mought care fer dem niggers ef you ties em togedder, Marse John.
But you ain't gwine be able to pertection 'em--not from each yuther,"
Vinegar announced as he slapped at his face with his kerchief. "I
wouldn't be tied to my nigger wife wid a telephone-wire long enough to
conversation de man in de moon. Naw, suh! Dat ole gal would be yankin'
on dat line a catfish all de time. Whoosh!"

"I agrees wid dem religium sentiments," Hitch Diamond rumbled. "Now you
example Goldie, my own wife. Dat little yeller gal's maw is a lunatic,
an' Goldie ain't no lunatic, but she ain't got her right mind. I
wouldn't mind bein' a Dandylion in de lion's den, like de Bible tells
about--dat would gib me a chance to fight fer my gizzard. But chained up
to Goldie--"

Hitch broke off, shook his head in earnest negation, rubbed one giant
hand around his iron-thewed wrist as if he could feel the holy bonds of
matrimony and gave utterance to one expressive word: "Gawd!"

"Hol' on, niggers!" Figger Bush exclaimed. "I don't foller you-alls in
dem sentiments. Now I been married to Scootie gwine on two year an' I
ain't never got too much of dat gal yit. I cherishes de opinion dat
Marse John could tie our heads togedder an' I wouldn't complain none."

"I sides wid Figger Bush," Mustard Prophet grinned. "I been livin' off
an' on wid Hopey fer twenty year, an' dat gal is busted stovewood over
my head off an' on plenty of times, but I don't bear her no grouch. She
kin always make peace by givin' me some hot biskits an' a few sirup."

"You four niggers talk too much," Flournoy grinned. "I want you to get
busy and decorate that Shoofly Church and pull the biggest Tickfall
church wedding ever seen in the social sets of our colored circles. I'll
pay for everything."

"Us fo' niggers will git our wifes an' pull some kind of nice stunt
ourselfs, too, Marse John," Vinegar howled. "We'll fix up a good
send-off fer 'em."

At seven o'clock that evening the Flournoy automobile conveyed the happy
pair to the Shoofly Church. The Rev. Vinegar Atts proceeded with the
ceremony until the bride sported a new ring and the two were pronounced
man and wife with the solemn admonition:

"Whom God hath joined together, let not man put asunder!"

Thereupon Sheriff Flournoy stepped forward and with the ease of long
practice slipped a manacle upon the right wrist of the bride and another
upon the left wrist of the groom and snapped the handcuffs shut.

Figger Bush stooped and lifted a long bottle from a bucket of ice. There
was a loud pop, the cork struck against the ceiling, ricochetted around
the walls of the room and caused a commotion by falling on Vinegar's
bald head. Figger advanced with a tray containing three glasses and the
sheriff toasted the bride and groom.

The ten-foot chain rattled as the bride raised her manacled hand to
drink.

When they marched out of the church the entire congregation formed a
procession and accompanied them to their cabin on the Coolie Bayou. They
noticed that Plaster Sickety picked up the chain and wrapped a turn
around his bride's neck and one about his own, thus shortening the bond
and bringing them close together. They clamped their arms around each
other's waists, and plodded solemnly through the deep dust of the
crooked highway.

"Dat nigger cain't park his wife like a new automobile an' walk off an'
leave her," Vinegar chuckled.

"He ain't actin' anxious to git away--now," Hitch rumbled
pessimistically.

"Not yit, but soon," Vinegar agreed.

Approaching the cabin, Plaster Sickety's voice broke into exultant song,
and through the negro's wonderful gift of improvisation, he produced
this neat bit:

    "Dar's a Pearline pearl of price untold,
    An' dat Pearline pearl cain't be bought wid gold;
    An' dat Pearline pearl am good to see,
    Fer dat Pearline pearl b'longs to me!"

"Listen to dat fool!" Hitch Diamond chuckled. "He's singin' like a
little black angel whut had swiped de pearliest pearl offen de pearly
gates!"

The bride and groom entered their cabin and softly closed the door.

Good night!


III.

"Looky here, Pearline, I ain't used to totin' dis ole steel band on my
wrist an' it hurts my feelin's," Plaster complained as he sat at the
breakfast-table before a meal which had been left on the door-step a few
minutes before by Hitch Diamond.

"Don't begin to howl an' pull back like a dawg tied under a wagin,
Plaster," Pearline urged prettily, as she helped herself to liberal
portions of the breakfast prepared in Sheriff Flournoy's kitchen. "You
won't kick about wearin' it as long as you loves me, will you?"

"No'm," Plaster said, as he lifted the chain to a more comfortable place
upon the dining-table. "But I shore wish dat white man hadn't choosed
such a heavy chain."

"Dis chain ain't heavy, Plaster," Pearline protested. "You hadn't
oughter talk dat way. Excusin' dat, I likes dis chain--it ties us to
each yuther. Don't you like it?"

"Yes'm, I shore does."

"How come you complains about it fer?"

"I ain't got no lament, Pearline--dat is, I ain't mean it dat way."

The bridegroom filled his mouth with food and for the next ten minutes
ate voraciously. One watching him would draw the inference that he was
not eating to enjoy the food so much as to find some occupation for his
mouth beside speech.

Pearline reached out with her free hand and toyed with the chain,
twisting it about her fingers lovingly, a dreamy light in her coal-black
eyes.

"Us had de biggest weddin' in cullud circles, Plaster," she murmured.

"I ain't no cullud circle," Plaster mumbled, his mouth full of food.
"But I reckin I got to run circles aroun' you 'slong as dis ole chain
stays on. Don't rattle dat chain so loud, Pearly! Gosh! It makes a heap
of racket fer its little size."

"You jes' now said it wus a big, heavy chain fer its size," his wife
reminded him in a sweetly argumentative tone.

"Yes'm, it am--dis chain is bofe little an' big--fer its size," the
groom amended hastily. "Stop talkin' about dis chain!"

"You started dis talk," she reminded him reproachfully. "You said it
hurted yo' wrist."

There was a loud knock upon the door. Plaster sprang up to answer. The
chain jerked at his wrist.

"Good gawsh!" he snorted. "Come to de door wid me, honey, so I kin open
up."

"I cain't, Plaster," the bride exclaimed in a panic. "I ain't dressed
fer comp'ny dis soon in de mawnin."

"You's got on all de clothes you owns," the groom reminded her.

"Suttinly, but I ain't got no white powder on my black nose," she
giggled. "Come back in de nex' room an' let me fresh up befo' we opens
de door."

"I stayed in dar a plum' hour while you wus freshin' up fer yo'
viteles," Plaster grumbled.

"Don't git grumped up, Plaster," Pearline urged. "You ack like yo' love
is commenced to wilt aroun' de edges."

Meekly the man followed her to the bedroom and stood for fifteen minutes
while the bride primped her hair, powdered her nose, adjusted her
collar, fiddled with her belt, put pins in her shirt-waist, took them
out and deposited them in her mouth, put them back into her waist,
turned around and looked at herself in the mirror, hunted for a fresh
handkerchief and could not find it, located it at last in the bosom of
her waist, wondered where she had left her chewing-gum, found it on top
of the box of face-powder, and finally said:

"Come on--less hurry up. Dat comp'ny will git tired waitin' fer us!"

"Dat comp'ny is gone done it," Plaster sighed. "I peeped through de
crack in de door an' seed 'em. Hitch Diamond knocked fo' times, den
opened de door an' picked up dem breakfast-dishes an' trod out."

"Dat's too bad," Pearline remarked with no interest whatever. She was
looking at herself in the mirror. "I'd like to seen Hitchie. He use to
be one of my ole sweethearts."

"Come out an' set under de tree wid me an' mebbe dat ole sweetheart of
yourn will come back," Plaster suggested.

"I don't like to git out in de sunshine," the girl replied. "Dar's too
much glare."

"Too much--which?" Plaster asked.

"Glare."

"Yes'm."

Plaster stood looking at her helplessly, wondering where they were going
from there.

"Does you love me, Plaster?" the girl asked, siding up to him and
stepping on the chain.

"Yes'm," Plaster answered as he pulled the chain from under her feet and
rubbed his wrist. "Don't step on dat chain no mo'. You might break it."

"How come you don't tell me you loves me?"

"I done tole you 'bout fawty times dis mawnin'," Plaster reminded her.

"But you ain't never tole me onless I axed you."

"Less go somewhar an' set down an' I'll tell you a millyum times,"
Plaster said eagerly.

"Bless Gawd, I knows you loves me a plum' plenty, but I likes to hear
you tell dem words. Wait a minute till I puts--er--I b'lieve I oughter
change de collar on dis dress. A clean one would make me look mo'
fresher."

Plaster lingered until the woman was dressed to her fancy, resting his
weight first on one impatient leg, then upon the other.

"You wastes a heap of time fixin' yo'se'f, Pearly," he sighed at last.
"I hopes you'll soon git dressed up fer de day."

"You wants yo' wife to look nice, don't you?" she asked reproachfully.

"Yes'm."

"How kin I look nice 'thout takin' de time to dress?"

They went out and sat down under the pecan-tree in the "glare." Pearline
seemed to have forgotten the glare. Plaster lighted a cigarette, smoked
it to the end, lighted another, smoked it to the end, and lighted
another. Then Pearline remarked:

"Honey, does you love me more dan you loves dem cigareets?"

"I shore does"--with moderate fervor.

"Does you love me a millyum times mo' dan you loves cigareets?"

"Suttinly."

"Den, fer gossake, throw dem cigareets away! Dey smells like some kind
o' fumigate."

"I cain't do that, Pearly. Dese here smokes costes money. An' I couldn't
affode to buy 'em ef I had to wuck fer de money. Dey's a weddin'
present."

"Is you gwine smoke all yo' married life?"

"Yes'm."

"But you ain't gwine smoke no mo' fer de nex' three days, is you?"

"No'm."

Pearline thrust her hand into Plaster's pocket and brought forth his
precious smokes. She concealed them in the mysterious recesses of her
attire and Plaster sighed deeply.

Ten minutes later the girl straightened up with a fierceness that nearly
snapped her spinal column.

"Fer mussy sake, Plaster Sickety! Whut is you got in yo' mouf?"

"I's nibblin' a few crumbs of terbacker, honey," Plaster said
apologetically.

"My gawsh! You aim to tell me dat you _chaws_?"

"Yes'm. I chaws a little bit now an' den. It kinder helps my brains to
think an' sottles my stomick."

There was a long silence. Plaster stared straight ahead of him, his
jaws moving with the regularity of a ruminant cow, his eyes counting
the leaves on the trees, the pickets on the broken-down fence, and
estimating the number of ants crawling out of a hill. Then,
unconsciously, he reached into his pocket for another cigarette.
He did not find it.

He heard a suspicious sound beside him and looked at Pearline.

"Whut you cryin' about honey?"

"You tole me you loved me more dan cigareets, an' yit you cain't set by
me a minute 'thout chawin' terbacker," she wailed. "You is blood kin
brudder to a worm an' a goat--nothin' else chaws!"

"Lawd!" Plaster sighed in desperation. "I sees now dat I'm got to learn
how to suck eggs an' hide de shells."

Suddenly a loud whoop was heard near at hand and out of the swamp came
Vinegar Atts, Figger Bush, Mustard Prophet and Hitch Diamond.

"Hey, niggers!" Plaster bawled. "Come up an' set down. Lawd, I nefer wus
so glad to see nobody in my whole life."

"Good mawnin', Sister Pearline!" Vinegar chuckled. "How is yo'-alls
enjoyin' mattermony life by now?"

"Fine," the bride smiled, with a suspicion of tears still in her eyes.

"Praise de Lawd!" exclaimed Vinegar. "I wus skeart you niggers would be
fightin' by now, an' mebbe one of yous would be draggin' de yuther on de
end o' dat chain--dead!"

"Naw, suh!" Plaster howled, as he snatched a cigar out of Hitch
Diamond's pocket and stuck it in his mouth. "Us is gittin' along
puffeckly."

Plaster snatched his cigar from his lips with his manacled hand and
flourished it with a motion of broad contentment. Pearline gave the
chain a quick jerk and the smoke flew from Plaster's fingers and fell
over in the high grass.

"You two idjits look like a holy show to me," Figger Bush cackled. "How
come you don't charge admissions to de show an' git rich?"

"Us wouldn't git rich quick," Pearline giggled. Hitch Diamond had
retrieved the cigar, and Pearline had taken it from him and stuck it in
her hair. "You-all is de onlies' comp'ny we is had till yit."

"I hopes you niggers will stay wid us all day, brudders," Plaster
exclaimed earnestly. "We wus feelin' kinder--er--me an' Pearline wus
feelin' sorter--er--"

"Uh-huh," Hitch Diamond grunted knowingly. "Dat's a fack. We ole married
folks onderstan's dem feelin's. I'd feel dat way mese'f ef I wus in yo'
fix. I'd whet up my teeth on a brick-bat an' bite myse'f in my own
gizzard an' die."

"Not me!" Figger Bush howled. "Ef I wus chained to dat little gal, I'd
git me a plow-line an' wrop it aroun' our necks."

"I would, too," Vinegar bellowed. "But I'd tie de yuther eend of dat
plow-line to a tree an' jump off de worl'."

"I bet Pearline don't hanker to jump offen no worl'," Mustard Prophet
proclaimed. "Look at her--she's jes' as happy as ef she had sense."

The eyes of the four men turned upon the girl appraisingly. Then
Pearline remembered that a few moments before she had been sniffling and
shedding tears. She was sure her eyes were red, and she knew the tears
had washed all the white powder off her black nose. Quickly she rose to
her feet, giving the ten-foot chain a sharp jerk.

"I hates to take you from yo' frien's, Plaster," she exclaimed, "but I'm
got to go in. I cain't stand de glare."

Side by side they entered the cabin and the chain rattled as they shut
the door.

And the evening and the morning were the first day.


IV.

"Stop scatterin' dem shavin's all over de floor, Plaster," Pearline
commanded. "Ef folks comes to see us, I don't want dis house all
literated up wid trash."

"I got to whittle while you sews, honey," Plaster said patiently. "I
wanted to sot out in the yard, but you kep' me in de house all yistiddy
afternoon because you said you had de headache from de glare."

"You kin whittle 'thout messin' up dis room," Pearline snapped.

"I likes a messy room," the man declared. "It looks like folks lived in
it an' wus tol'able comfer'ble."

"You cain't mess up my house ef I got to come atter you an' clean up,"
the woman replied in a tone of finality.

A hound-dog stuck his wistful face into the door, seeking an invitation
to enter.

"Dar's a frien' in need," the bridegroom proclaimed happily. "Come here,
dawg!"

"Git out o' here!" the woman shrieked, kicking at the hound and sending
him out with a howl. "I don't want dat houn' in dis house scratchin' his
fleas all over de rooms. Look at de mud dat dawg tracked in. Come wadin'
through de bayou an' den come trackin' through de house!"

"Dar's some advantages in livin' a dawg's life, Pearline," Plaster
sighed. "Even excusin' de fleas, dar's plenty advantage. A dawg, even a
married dawg, he ain't tied up all de time an' kin run aroun' some."

"You aims to say you's gittin' tired stayin' here wid me?" Pearline
snapped.

"No'm. Nothin' like dat. I's happy as a mosquiter on a pickaninny's
nose."

"Ef you feels tied up like a houn'-dawg in de middle of de secont day,
how does you expeck to feel in de middle of de secont year?"

Plaster thought it best not to venture a reply. He looked through the
open door at the hound, lying under the china-berry tree in the glare,
placidly scratching fleas, bumping the elbow of his hind leg on the soft
ground as he scratched.

"Don't you never answer no 'terrogations when I axes you?" Pearline
asked sharply. "How you gwine feel in de middle of de secont year?"

Out of sheer perversity Plaster was disposed to tell her that he would
feel dead and buried for at least a year before the time she mentioned,
but instead he swallowed hard three times. His throat was dry and his
tongue rasped his mouth like sandpaper. His answer, finally, was a song:

    "She'll be sweeter as de days go by;
    She'll git sweeter as de moments fly;
    She'll git sweeter an' be dearer
    As to me she draws mo' nearer--
    Sweeter as de days go by."

Thereupon Pearline jumped from her chair, got strangle-hold upon her
husband, sat down on him, and impressed him forcibly in the next
half-hour that his wife was a heavyweight and the day was extremely
warm.

Plaster made such a hit with his improvised song that he repeated it
three times, then gradually eased his wife off his lap and onto a chair.

"Don't you never shave yo' face, Plaster?" the lady asked when the love
scene ended. "You feels like a stubby shoe-brush."

"No'm, my whiskers don't pester me none."

"But dey looks so bad," the woman urged.

"I cain't see 'em," Plaster grinned.

"I wants you to shave eve'y day while you is married to me."

"Huh," Plaster grunted.

"An I wants you to brush up yo' clothes, Plaster," the woman told him.
"You looks scandalous dusty."

"I looks as good as you does," Plaster retorted. "I's got powdered dirt
on my clothes an' you's got powdered chalk on yo' nose. You looks to
dang dressy fer me anyhow. I favors bein' dusty an' easy-feelin'."

The discussion ended by the appearance of three women who came to the
open door from the highroad.

"Look at dat, now!" Plaster exclaimed. "Here comes three ole gals of
mine. I co'ted 'em all servigerous but it didn't git me nothin'."

"Whut dey buttin' in here fer?" Pearline asked in sharp tones.

"Mebbe dey'll tell us when dey comes in," Plaster chuckled.

The three women were the wives of Hitch Diamond, Figger Bush, and
Vinegar Atts. When they entered they came straight to the point.

"Plaster, us ladies wants to talk to Sister Pearline Flunder Sickety in
privut."

"Dat cain't be did, sisters," Plaster answered, looking them over
suspiciously. "Whut does you want to tell my wife in privut?"

"Dat's a secret," Scootie Bush giggled.

Plaster looked at the women with an earnest effort to read their
intentions. He recalled certain incidents in his association with the
three in the old days of happy courtship that he preferred his wife
should not know. He thought he saw mischief in the eyes of each of the
women, especially Scootie and Goldie, and he shook his head.

"Nothin' ain't told in privut, sisters," he announced. "Leastwise, not
till after de third day."

"Does you aim to say dat I cain't conversation in privut wid my
frien's?" Pearline snapped.

"No'm not perzackly dat," Plaster hastened to explain. "But it looks
kinder onpossible to me as long as I'm tied up wid you on dis chain."

"Git over again dat wall while dese ladies whispers to me," Pearline
replied, giving him a push.

Plaster sat down and strained his ears to hear. What he heard was
spasmodic giggles. He saw mischievous glances directed to himself. Once
he saw his wife look straight at him reproachfully, as if she suspected
that he was trying to overhear. There was half an hour of this, then the
three giggling women took their departure.

"Whut did dem nigger women want, Pearline?" Plaster demanded.

"Dat's a fambly secret," Pearline giggled.

"Does you think you oughter hab any secrets from yo' cote-house
husbunt?" Plaster demanded belligerently.

"Naw, suh. Not no secrets dat stays secrets, but dis here little myst'ry
will git public powerful soon."

Coming through the medium of Plaster's troubled conscience, this answer
sounded ominous. Pearline picked up some sewing and Plaster reached for
his unwhittled stick. He spent one half-hour in deep thought. He was
sorry he had told Pearline that those three women were old sweethearts
of his. He recalled that his courtship of each woman had broken up in a
row and a fist-fight. It had been one-sided, the women conducting the
row and doing all the fighting while Plaster endeavored to escape. Now
Plaster had no other idea than that they were hot on his trail. They
were planning to make his life miserable through the jealousy of his
wife.

There was a loud knock on the front door. The two arose and the door
opened to Vinegar Atts, Figger Bush, and Hitch Diamond.

"Sister Sickety, us three niggers is a cormittee of three app'inted to
wait in privut on Brudder Plaster Sickety an' hol' a secret confab wid
him," Vinegar announced pompously.

"I don't allow my husbunt to hab no secrets from me," Pearline answered
looking suspiciously at her old sweetheart, Hitch Diamond.

"Dis am a man's pussonal bizzness, Pearline," Hitch Diamond rumbled. "A
nigger woman is got to butt out."

"But I's chained up wid Plaster," Pearline protested.

"Git over agin dat wall while dese gen'lemens whispers to me," Plaster
remarked, giving her a push toward the chair which he had occupied under
similar circumstances a short time before.

The three committeemen walked up close to Plaster, draped their arms
over his shoulders, and talked in whispers, but guffawed out loud.
Because Pearline was present their eyes irresistibly sought hers,
especially when they laughed--what man can keep from looking at the
woman in a room?--and Pearline inferred that they were talking and
laughing about her. She strained her ears to hear, but not a word
enlightened her ignorance. Then with a loud laugh the three men
patted Plaster on the back and took themselves off.

"Whut did them niggers want, Plaster?" Pearline demanded in irate tones.

"Dat's a fambly secret," Plaster quoted mockingly.

"I felt like a fool wid dem mens lookin' at me an' snickerin'," the
woman complained. "Wus dey talkin' about me?"

"Yes'm," the man chuckled.

This remark set Pearline to thinking about certain incidents. Hitch had
been an old sweetheart, Figger Bush and Vinegar Atts had paid her
courtly attentions, and some things had happened that she would rather
not have to explain to her husband. There was a dismal depthless gulf of
painful silence between the honeymooners for a long time. Then Pearline
said with difficulty:

"I don't like de nigger mens you 'socheates wid. Dem three niggers ain't
fitten comp'ny fer my husbunt."

"Dat's whut I thinks about dem three womens dat come to see you,"
Plaster answered. "Ef you runs wid dat color of petticoats I shore will
disrespeck you mo' dan I does now."

"I runs wid anybody I chooses," Pearline snapped.

"Me, too," Plaster retorted.

They pulled apart and the chain rattled.

They stepped back from the entrance and closed the door.

And the evening and the morning were the second day.


V.

By sleeping until the noon-hour the two love-captives shortened the
third day by half.

In the two days past they had exhausted every theme of conversation, had
wearied of every kind of amusement they could devise, and had pumped
their hearts dry of language to proclaim and protest their affection for
each other to lubricate the machinery of existence amid the friction of
their disposition and temperament.

The day before Plaster had made a hit with a song, so he decided to fill
every moment of that day until the sun sank below the horizon with vocal
music, for song banishes conversation and song is not provocative of
difference of opinion and argument--so he thought. While he and his wife
were dressing, Plaster began:

    "Does you know dat I am dyin'
      Fer a little bit of love?
    Everywhar dey hears me sighin'
      Fer a little bit of love.
    Fer dat love dat grows mo' strong,
      Fills de heart wid hope and song,
    I has waited--oh, so long--
      Fer a little bit of love."

"Whut makes you sing so dang loud, Plaster?" Pearline asked wearily, as
she rested her head upon her hands. "You sounds like a brayin' jackace
mournin' because he done tumbled down a open well."

"One time you said you liked my singin'," Plaster retorted.

"I couldn't tell you whut I really thought about it in dem sad days,"
Pearline remarked.

They ate their noon meal in silence because neither could think of
anything to say. Plaster had got the hook at the very beginning of his
musical career, and the things he thought of to say were not fit for
utterance or publication.

As they rose from the table, they looked with surprise out of the
window.

A long procession of negroes approached the cabin. All were dressed in
their best clothes and the Rev. Vinegar Atts was in the lead.

The bridal pair suddenly remembered something, and they stepped out on
the porch to receive them as they filled the space in front of the
house.

Vinegar took his famous preaching attitude in front of the porch,
inflated his lungs and began:

"Brudder an' Sister Sickety, us is all rejoiced dat you two honey-loves
is got mighty nigh through wid yo' honey-tower widout no fuss or fight.
We welcomes you back to our sawsiety wid glad arms. We hopes dat you
will love each yuther mo' or less an' off an' on ferever! We knows dat
you has well earnt dis house an' lot dat Marse John Flournoy has gib you
an' we cullud folks wants to make you a present of a few change so you
kin buy some nice house-furnicher an' start out fresh an' new."

Thereupon Vinegar laid his stove-pipe hat upside down upon the floor of
the porch, turned and surveyed the assembly while he mopped his bald
head with a yellow bandana handkerchief.

"Walk right up, brudders an' sisters, an' drap yo' few change in dis
stove-pipe preachin'-hat!"

They came up one by one, laughingly depositing their money, and pausing
to shake hands with the bride and groom.

When the ceremony ended, Vinegar emptied his hat upon the floor of the
porch, placed it upon his head with a farewell flourish, and led the
negroes out of the yard.

"Dis money is de fambly secret dem three nigger womens whispered to me,
honey," Pearline giggled.

"Dat's de myst'ry dem three committee fellers tole me," Plaster
chuckled.

The two sat down and counted the money--twenty-five dollars and thirty
cents!

"Dat thuty cents is yourn to spend foolish, Pearline," Plaster said
generously as he pushed three dimes toward her and clutched with both
hands at the rest.

"Hol' on nigger!" Pearline snapped. "I ain't no bayou minnow to git jes'
a little nibble of dat money--half of dat cash spondulix is mine."

"Yes'm, but I is de man of de fambly an' I oughter keep it an' han' it
out to you as you needs it."

"I needs my half right now," Pearline snapped, placing both her hands
upon the clutching paws of Plaster Sickety.

"Whut you gwine do wid twelve dollars an' fo' bits?" Plaster demanded in
irate tones.

"Buy me a hat!" Pearline told him.

"You's a fool!" Plaster informed her. "Female hats ain't furnicher."

"Dis money furnishes me wid a hat," she announced positively.

Then they sat for a few minutes in silence, both keeping their hands
spread out over the money.

"Whut you gwine do wid yo' twelve dollars an' fo' bits?" Pearline
demanded at last.

"I figgers on buyin' a fiddle," Plaster told her. "Plenty money kin be
made playin' fiddles, an' I b'lieves I could learn to fiddle ef I had a
good chance."

"I ain't gwine hab no fiddlin' nigger in my house," Pearline snorted.
"I's druther be married to a phoneygraft."

"You ain't gwine be married to nothin' very long ef you don't leggo dis
money, nigger!" Plaster snarled.

"I is."

"You ain't."

"Don't gimme no sass."

"You sassed me fust."

The woman raised one hand from the money and made an unexpected
sideswipe at Plaster's jaw with her open palm. The blow landed with a
smack that jarred the very marrow of his bones and keeled him over the
edge of the porch to the ground. As he fell sprawling, the chain
tightened and jerked Pearline off her perch and she fell to the ground
with a squall. Then for ten minutes there was a Kilkenny cat scrap on
the front lawn.

Pearline bit and scratched and pulled hair and tore clothes. She had
decidedly the best of the rookus until her unusual activities caused her
to get a twist of the chain around her neck. Plaster thanked the Lord
and choked her into inaction and submission by the simple process of
pretending to escape from her and thus tightening the chain.

When she was choked almost to suffocation, he edged her to the porch,
lifted the twenty-five dollars and thirty cents into his own pockets,
and released the chain.

[Illustration: "THE BLOW LANDED WITH A SMACK THAT JARRED THE VERY MARROW
OF HIS BONES AND KEELED HIM OVER THE EDGE OF THE PORCH TO THE GROUND."]

When Pearline recovered her breath she dropped flat upon the ground at
her feet and howled like a Comanche until the going down of the sun.

Plaster did not attempt to console or quiet her. When he spoke again, he
reached out and touched the bawling woman with his foot.

"Git up idjit!" he exclaimed. "Marse John expecks us to come an' repote
to him an' git dese here handcuffs tuck off."

Sheriff John Flournoy was waiting for them as they came across his lawn
to the porch where he sat.

Then for half an hour he listened to a tirade of crimination and
recrimination which crackled with profane expletives like thorns under a
pot. When Plaster paused to breathe, Pearline took up the complaint.
When Pearline stopped from exhaustion, Plaster resumed his lamentations.

When the storm of vituperation subsided, Flournoy sat in his chair like
a man who had been pounded over the head with a brick. It was some time
before he could formulate his ideas. Then he spoke with difficulty.

"I judge from what I have heard that your three days' experience
together has convinced you that your tastes are entirely dissimilar and
your natures incompatible."

"Yes, suh, dat's c'reck."

"The information you offer conveys to me the impression that a woman
loves shadows, but a man loves sunshine and glare; a woman loves dress,
but a man loves tobacco; a woman desires daintiness and neatness
attended with any degree of discomfort, but a man prefers comfort with
no matter how much litter and mess; a woman loves indoor sports, like
sewing, and a man loves outdoor sports, like whittling sticks and making
the acquaintance of a hound-dog with fleas on his body and mud on his
feet; a man loves to sing and hear himself sing, and the woman prefers
to hear some other man sing; a woman wants her female companions with
their confidences and their secrets, and a man desires his male
companions and their secrets, but neither party to the matrimonial
alliance is willing that the partner should keep a secret. Am I right as
far as I've gone?"

"Dat's right!" they said in positive tones.

"But de fuss part, Marse John, is de money!" the woman shrieked.

"Certainly," Flournoy agreed softly. "Matrimony is always a matter of
money."

Then Flournoy took a key from his pocket and opened the bracelets on
their wrists. The chain fell at their feet. The bride and bridegroom
looked away, each ignoring the presence of the other.

Plaster Sickety thrust both hands into his pockets, brought out
twenty-five dollars and thirty cents and laid it into the open palm of
the sheriff.

"Fer Gawd's sake, git me a deevo'ce!" he pleaded.

"Make it two, Marse John," the girl urged. "I's plum' nauseated wid dat
nigger man."

The bride and bridegroom turned and walked away, choosing different
paths and going in opposite directions. They did not look back.

The sheriff stooped and picked up the rattling chain.

Then he went into the house and slammed the door.

The evening and the morning were the third day, and--




FOURTH TALE

PRINCESS OR PERCHERON

BY PERLEY POORE SHEEHAN


I.

Some queer things had taken place in this same hall--some very queer
things; but there were indications that this present affair was going to
be queerer yet.

The old duke always had been a worthy descendant of his ancestors; like
them, a little mad, with flashes of genius, very fine, very brutal, a
murderer at heart, with a love for poetry and philosophic speculation.

The guests were already in a smiling tremor of curiosity when they
arrived. Some of them whispered among themselves:

"It's on account of the Princess Gabrielle."

"They say the duke is furious."

"Not astonishing. But--a marriage! How can there be a marriage?"

Yet it looked as if a marriage there would be. Manifestly, the hall had
been prepared for some such event.

It was a chamber long, lofty and broad, walled and floored with the
native Burgundy rock, richly carpeted, hung with tapestry. And down a
portion of the length of this ran a wide table already spread with the
viands of a wedding-feast--huge cold pasties, hams and boarheads
beautifully jellied, fresh and candied fruits from Spain and Sicily,
flagons and goblets of crystal, silver, and gold.

What aroused curiosity and conjecture to the highest point, however, was
the discovery that the immense fireplace of the hall had been
transformed into a forge. It was a forge complete--bellows and hearth,
anvil and tub, hammers and tongs. There was even a smutty-faced imp
there to tend the forge fire, which already hissed and glowed as he
worked the bellows.

"Aha! So there _was_ a smith mixed up in the affair, after all!"

"_Mais oui!_ Gaspard, the smith, whose forge is down there on the banks
of the Rhone."

"But what does the duke intend to do?"

It was a question which more than one was asking. There was never any
forecasting what a whim of the duke might lead him to do even in
ordinary circumstances--declare war on France, call a new Crusade. And
now, with this menace of scandal in his family!

There in front of the fireplace where the forge had been set up, the
valets had placed the ducal chair. All the same, the arrangements had
something sinister about them. There fell a period of silence touched
with panic. But not for long. Curiosity was too acute and powerful to be
long suppressed. The whispering resumed:

"The duke surprised them together--the princess and her smith."

"It looks like the torture for one or both."

"They say the fellow's an Apollo, a Hercules."

"You wait until the duke--"

"Silence! He comes."

One of the large doors toward the farther end of the hall was thrown
open, and through this there came a surge of music--hautboys, viols, and
flutes. Two guardsmen came in, helmeted, swords drawn, and took up their
stations at either side of the door.

There entered the duke.

He looked the philosopher, perhaps, if not the student--tall, bent,
bony; a brush of white hair bristling over the top of his high and
narrow head; a fleshless face, sardonic and humorous. The guests were
pleased to see that his mood was amiable. He came forward smiling, waved
his musicians into retreat; and half a dozen valets were assisting him
into his chair as he greeted his guests. They all bent the knee to him.
Some kissed his hand--and some he kissed, especially those who were fair
and of the opposite sex.

If Princess Gabrielle had shown herself fragile in the matter of her
affections, well, she had come by her failing honestly.

Seated in his chair, the duke delivered himself of a little pun which
convulsed his audience--something about "court and courtship": "_Je
fais--la cour._"

And with no other preliminary he spoke to a page:

"Summon _mademoiselle_."

Then to another:

"Fetch in the smith."

There was a bitter smile on his face as he sank back into his chair and
studied the forge set up in the fireplace. The imp went white under his
smudge and worked the bellows until the fire on the hearth was spouting
like a miniature Vesuvius.

The wait was brief.

Once more the musicians struck into the royal march of Burgundy, and
there was the Princess Gabrielle.

Every one who looked at her must have experienced some thrill of the
heart--envy, desire, pure admiration. It was impossible to look at her
without some emotion; for she was eighteen, slender, white and
passionate; with dusky, copper-colored hair hanging in two heavy curls
forward over her brilliantly tender shoulders; and she had a broad, red
mouth, and slightly dilated nostrils; dark eyes, liquid and heavily
fringed, with disquieting shadows under them.

She came forward with a number of maidens in her train, but she so
dominated them that she appeared to be alone. She took her time. She was
a trifle rebellious, perhaps. But she was brave, not to say bold. She
tossed her head slightly. She smiled. She and her maidens, familiar with
the duke's intentions, grouped themselves at one side of the improvised
forge. Every one present was still looking at her when there came a
rough command:

"Stand aside!"

A good many of the guests were not in the habit of hearing orders except
from the duke himself; but the command came again:

"Stand aside! Let me pass--me and my people!"

At that there was a rapid shifting of the crowd and a whispered cry:

"The smith! It's Gaspard the smith!"

And he attracted even more attention than the princess had done; for,
manifestly, here was not only a man who could play the game of love, but
could play the game of life and death as well--to shout out like this,
and come striding like this into the presence of his ruler.

But he looked the part.

He was all of six feet tall, blond and supple and beautifully fleshed.
He was wearing his blacksmith's outfit of doeskin and leather, but he
was scoured and shaven to the pink. His great arms were bare; and the
exquisitely sculptured muscles of these slipped and played under a skin
as white as a woman's.

He stood there with his shoulders back, his arms folded, feet apart.
But, curiously, there was no insolence in the posture. Insolence is a
quality of the little heart, the little soul, and shows itself in the
eyes. Gaspard the smith had gentle blue eyes, large, dark, fearless, and
with a certain brooding pride in them. There may have been even a hint
of virgin bashfulness in them as well, during that moment he glanced at
the Princess Gabrielle. Then he had looked at the duke, and all his
courage had come back to him, perhaps also a suggestion of challenge.

But neither had the smith come into the ducal presence alone.

There were two old people--a man and a woman, peasants, both of them
very poor, very humble, so frightened that they could breathe only with
their mouths open; and so soon as they were inside the circle of guests,
they had dropped to their knees. The other member of the smith's party
would have done the same had he permitted. This was a girl of twenty or
so, likewise a peasant, healthy, painfully abashed, but otherwise not
notable. To her the smith had given a nudge and a word of encouragement,
so that now she stood close to him and back of him.

"Our friends," said the duke, with studied nonchalance, "we are about to
present to you the initial operation of scientific experiment. Like all
scientific research, this also should be judged solely by its possible
contribution to the advancement of human happiness. Ourself, we feel
that this contribution will be great. God knows it is concerned with a
problem that is both elusive and poignant."

All this was rather above Gaspard's head. He turned to the imp at the
bellows.

"Stop blowing that fire so hard," he whispered. "You're wasting
charcoal."

The duke smiled grimly.

"The problem," he continued, "is this: Can any man and woman, however
devoted, continue to love each other if they are too closely held
together?"

There was a slight movement among some of the younger gentlemen and
ladies present--a few knowing smiles.

"There have always been those who answered _No_; there have always been
those who answered _Yes_," the duke went on. "Which were right?" No
answer. "My granddaughter here, while having her horse shod some weeks
ago, became enamored of this worthy subject of mine." He nodded toward
the smith. "She would have him. She would have no one else. We knew how
hopeless would be any attempt to impose our will--in an affair of the
heart." He smiled gallantly. "We are familiar with the breed."

"Long live the House of Burgundy," cried the chivalrous young Vicomte de
MÃ¢con. But the duke silenced him with a look.

"And now," said the duke, "we wish to test this so great passion of
hers--test it under conditions that while apparently extraordinary are
none the less classical and scientific. Our experiment is this--"

For the first time since he began to speak the duke now leaned forward,
and both his face and his voice took on that quality which made his name
a source of trembling from Spain to Denmark.

"Our experiment is this:

"_To have the princess and her smith, whom she is so sure she loves,
handcuffed and linked together by a ten-foot chain._"


II.

There was a gasp from the audience. Every one stared at the princess.
Even the duke himself. Without turning his head he took her in with his
furtive eyes.

"_Mlle. la Princess_," he said icily, "was good enough to insist upon
the sacrifice."

At this, a stain of richer color slowly crept up the throat of the
Princess Gabrielle; there came a touch of extra fire to her eyes.
Perhaps she would have spoken. But the duke hadn't finished yet.

"We'll see whether she loves him so much or not," said the duke. "We'll
give them three days of it--three days to go and come as they wish--and
to do as they wish--together--always together--bound to each other by
their ten-foot chain."

But while the excitement caused by the duke's announcement was still
crisping the nerves of every one present, the smith had cast one more
glance in the direction of the Princess Gabrielle. And this time their
eyes met. There were those who saw a glint of terror--of delicious
terror--in the eyes of the princess; and in the eyes of Gaspard a look
intended to be reassuring.

Then the smith had unfolded his arms, thrust them forward.

"Wait," he cried.

At that there was a fresh sensation.

For it was seen that one of his wrists--his left--was already encircled
by a bracelet of shining steel, forged there of a single piece, and that
to the bracelet itself there was forged a link, fine but powerful, and
that other links ran back over his shoulder.

"Ha!" snarled the duke. "So you've come prepared!"

"By the grace of God!" replied Gaspard the smith, unafraid. He cast a
look about him, brought his eyes back to the duke. "_Moi_, Gaspard," he
said, "I forge my own chains--always! I'm a smith, I am."

The two old people kneeling just back of him began to sob and to groan.
Gaspard turned and looked down at them.

"Shut up," he ordered; "I'm talking."

He smiled at the duke. He explained.

"You see, they're frightened," he said. "When I found out what your
highness and your highness's lady-granddaughter were planning up here
in the castle, why, I went to these old folks and told them that I
wanted their daughter Susette."

"I suppose you loved her," the duke put in with ironical intent.

But the smith saw no reason for irony.

"Eh, _bon Dieu_!" he ejaculated. "And save your highness's respect,
we've loved each other ever since we were out of the cradle, we have. So
I made the old folks consent. I'm a smith, I am. I forge my own chains.
Stand around, Susette! His highness won't hurt you. Look!"

He stepped aside. He gave a gentle thrust to the girl who had been
sheltering back of him. The chain rattled.

And there was another cry of surprise.

One of the girl's wrist's also was ornamented with a steel handcuff
tightly welded. Not only that, but to this also was attached a chain.
The smith threw up his arm. It was the same chain that was welded to his
own handcuff--ten feet of it, glistening steel, unbreakable.

"There's your ten-foot chain, highness," cried Gaspard. "And it's no
trick-chain, either," he added. "It's a chain that will hold. You bet
it will. I forged it myself, and I know. It's a chain you couldn't buy.
Why? Because--because the iron of it's mixed with love. Nor can it be
cut, nor filed, nor broken. I'm a smith, I am. And each link of it I
tempered myself--with sweat and blood."

There for a time it was a question--possibly a question in the mind of
the duke himself--just how many minutes the smith still had to live.
Many a valet had been executed for less. During a period of about thirty
seconds the duke's face went black. Then the blackness dispersed. He
slowly smiled.

After all, he wasn't to be cheated of his experiment.

But he answered the question that was in his own mind and the minds of
all the others there as he looked at the smith and said:

"Fool, you'll be sufficiently punished--by your own device."

He let his eyes drift again to the Princess Gabrielle.

"And thou," he said, "art sufficiently punished already."


III.

It happened to be a day of late spring; and as Gaspard and this
strangely wedded bride of his and her parents came out of the castle,
both fed and forgiven, it must have seemed to all of them that this was
the most auspicious moment of their lives. The old folks, who had
partaken freely of the generous wines pressed upon them, had now passed
from their trembling terror to a spirit of frolic. Arm in arm, their
sabots clogging, they did a rigadoon down the winding road. It was a
spirit of tender elation, though, that dominated Gaspard and Susette.
They were like two beings distilled complete from the mild and fragrant
air, the sweet mistiness of the verdant valley, the purpling solemnity
of the Juras.

"What did he mean, his highness?" asked Susette as she pressed the
smith's arm closer to her side. "What did he mean that you'd be punished
by your own device?"

Gaspard looked down at her, pressed her manacled wrist to his lips, took
thought.

"I don't know," he answered gently. "He must be crazy. It's like calling
it punishment when a true believer receives the reward of paradise."

"You love me so much as that?"

"_Pardi!_" he ejaculated. "And thou?"

"So much," she palpitated, "so much that when you looked at the princess
like that--I wished you were blind!"

At the bottom of the hill, the old folks, Burgundians to the souls of
them, happily bade the young couple to be off about their own affairs.
They knew how it was with young married people. The old were
obstacles--so they themselves well recalled--albeit that was more than
twenty years ago.

Said Gaspard fondly: "This business has put me back in my work; but
we'll call this a holiday. Shall we go to my cottage or into the forest?
I know of a secret place--"

"Into the forest," whispered Susette. "I don't like the forge. It makes
me think--think of that cursed princess--and of the work that almost
lost you to me." Her blue eyes filmed as she looked up at him. "Oh,
Gaspard, I also have dreamed so much--of love--a life of love with
thee!"

There was no one there to see. Some day, perhaps, in the far distant
future, this part of the world would be thickly populated. But this was
not yet the case. Gaspard brought his bride close to his breast, smiled
gravely into her upturned face. He kissed her tears away. Sweet Susette!
She was such a child! How little she knew of life!

And yet what was that fragile, fluttering, elusive, tiny suggestion of a
regret in the back of his brain? Now he saw it; now it was gone--a
silver moth of a thought, yet one, some instinct warned him, was there
to gnaw a hole in his happiness.

He said nothing about this to Susette, of course; he chased it from his
own joy. And this joy was a beautiful, tumultuous thing.

"It's like the source of the Rhone, which I saw one time--this joy of
ours," he said with placid rapture. "All sparkling it was, and wild
cataracts, and deep places, clean and full of mystery."

"Ah, I want it to be always like this," said Susette.

Gaspard let himself go in clear-sighted thought. They were seated on a
grassy shelf that overhung the great river. The forest hemmed them in
on three sides like a wedding-bower fashioned to order; but here they
could follow the Rhone for miles--with its drifting barges, its
red-sailed shallops, its hamlets, and villages.

"Yes, ever like the Rhone," he said; "but growing, like the Rhone, until
it's broad and majestic and strong to carry burdens--"

Susette interrupted him.

"Kiss me," she said. "Kiss me again. No--not like that; like you did a
while ago."

And Gaspard, laughing, did as he was bidden. But what was that silver
glint of something like a regret, something like a loss, that came
fluttering once more across the atmosphere of his thought? Susette,
though, kept him diverted. She was forever popping in upon his
reflections with innocent, childish questions; and he found this
infinitely amusing.

"Did you desire me--more than the princess?"

"Beloved, I have desired you for years."

"Did you think me more beautiful--than she?"

Again Gaspard laughed; but it set him to thinking. He liked to think. He
thought at his forge, at his meals, nights when he happened to be
awake.

"Love and beauty," he said, "these are created by desire. As a
stone-cutter desires what is hidden in the rock, and hews it out and
loves the thing he shapes, though it be as ugly as a gargoyle, because
of the desire that brought it forth--"

"Do you think that I'm a gargoyle?" queried Susette hastily.

"Certainly not."

"Then, why did you call me one?"

So he had to console her again, and took a certain joy in it, although
she protracted the dear, silly dispute by telling him that he had
chained her to him simply so that he could torture her, and that he had
wanted to spare the princess such suffering, and that therefore it was
clear that he loved the princess more.

"Why, no," said Gaspard; "as for that, she's really in love with that
young Sieur de MÃ¢con."

But thereupon Susette wanted to know how he came to be so well informed
as to the contents of the lady's heart. So the smith gave over any
attempt to reason, except in the silences of his brain; and just
confined his outer activities to cooings and caresses, as Susette would
have him do.

Yet his thought would persist.

That was the trail of a great truth he had almost stated back there,
about the place held by desire in the origins of love and beauty. He had
watched a certain Italian named Botticelli do a mural painting in the
duke's private chapel. Lord, there was a passion! He had helped in the
building of the cathedral at Sens. Lord, what fervor the builders put
into their work! They were all like young lovers.

The smith sat up. It was almost as if he had cornered that glinting moth
of doubt.

Yes, they had been like young lovers--Sieur Botticelli, in pursuit of
the beautiful; the church-builders in pursuit of God. But--and here was
the point--what if their desire had been satisfied? The quest would have
stopped. The vision of the artist would have faded. The steeple would
have fallen down. For desire would have ceased to exist.

"I'm hungry and I'm thirsty," said Susette.

He kissed her pensively. They started home.


IV.

"Gaspard! Gaspard!"

The smith sat up swiftly on his couch.

"What's the matter?" he demanded.

All the same, in spite of certain disquieting dreams, it struck him as
sweet and curious to be awakened like that by Susette. But he perceived
that she was alarmed.

"Some one hammers at the door," she said.

Then he heard it himself, that thing he had already been hearing
obscurely in his sleep.

"Coming!" he yelled. And he smilingly explained to Susette: "It's my
old friend, Joseph, the carter. He'd bring his work to me if he had
to travel five leagues." And he was for jumping up and running to
the door.

"Wait," cried Susette. "I'll have to go with you, and I can't be seen
like this."

"That's right," said Gaspard. "That confounded chain! I'd forgotten all
about it." So he called out again to his friend, and the two of them
held quite a conversation while Susette tried to make herself
presentable. But Gaspard turned to her as she shook her hair out for the
third time, starting to rearrange it. "Quick!" he urged. "He's in a
hurry. One of his horses has cast a shoe."

"You can't show yourself like that, either," cried Susette, playing for
time.

"Me?" laughed Gaspard. "I'm a smith. I'd like to see a smith who
couldn't show himself in singlet and apron!"

"You look like a brigand."

But he merely laughed: "Joseph won't mind."

And, indeed, Joseph the carter did appear to have but little thought for
anything except the work in hand. For that matter, neither, apparently,
did Gaspard. After the first few brief civilities and the inevitable
jests about the chain, their attention was absorbed at once by the
horses. There were four of these--Percherons, huge monsters with shaggy
fetlocks and massive feet; yet Joseph and Gaspard went about lifting
these colossal hoofs, and considering them as tenderly as if the two had
been young mothers concerned with the feet of babes.

At last Susette let out a little cry, and both men turned to look at
her.

"I faint," she said weakly.

And Gaspard sprang over and caught her in his arms. He was filled with
pity. He was all gentleness.

"Are you sick?" he asked.

"It was the odor of the horses," Susette replied in her small voice.

Joseph the carter seemed to take this as some aspersion on himself.
"Those horses don't smell," he asserted stoutly.

But Gaspard signaled him to hold his place. "You'll be all right in a
second or so," he told his wife. He spoke gently; although, as a matter
of fact, he himself could find nothing about those magnificent animals
to offend the most delicate sensibility. "You'll be all right. You can
come into the forge and sit down while I shoe the big gray."

"That will be worse than ever," wailed Susette.

Joseph the carter was an outspoken man, gruff and honest.

"And there's a woman for you," he said, "to be not only wed but welded
to a smith! _Nom d'un tonnerre!_ Say, then, Gaspard, I'm in a hurry.
Shall we start with the gray?"

"Yes," Gaspard answered softly, as he continued to support Susette.

"No, no, no!" cried Susette. "Not to-day! I'm too sick."

"_Mais, chÃ©rie_," Gaspard began.

"You love your work better than you do me," sobbed Susette.

"_Nom d'un pourceau!_" droned Joseph.

"But this work is important," Gaspard argued desperately. "The gray has
not only cast a shoe, but the shoes on the others are loose. They've got
to be attended to. It's work that will bring me in a whole _Ã©cu_."

"I don't care," said Susette. "I can't stand the smell of those horses,
and I could never, never bear the smell of the hot iron on their hoofs."

"But I'm a smith," argued Gaspard.

It was his ultimate appeal.

"I told you that you loved your work more than you did me," whimpered
Susette, beginning to cry. "'_I'm a smith; I'm a smith_'--that's all
you've talked about since you got me in your power."

Joseph the carter went away. He did so shaking his head, followed by his
shining Percherons, which were as majestic as elephants, but as gentle
as sheep. There was a tugging at Gaspard's heart as he saw them go.
Such horses! And no one could shoe a horse as could he. He looked down
at Susette's bowed head as she lay there cuddled in his arms. That
despairing cry was again swelling in his chest: "But I'm a smith." He
silenced it. He stroked the girl's head.

As he did so, he was mindful as never before of the clink and jangle of
the chain.


V.

"What do you want me to do?" he asked that afternoon as they lay out in
the shade of the poplars along the river bank.

"I want you to love me," she answered.

"I do love you. But we can't live on love--can we, Susette?--however
pleasant that would be. I've got to work."

"Ah, your _sacrÃ©_ work!"

"Still, you'll admit that you can't pick up _Ã©cus_ in the road."

"You're thinking still of that miserable carter."

"No; but I'm thinking of his horses. Somebody's got to shoe them. You
can't let them go lame--or be lamed by a bungler. I could have done
that job as it should have been done."

"But I tell you," declared Susette, pronouncing each word with an
individual stress, "I can't support the grime and the odors and the
racket of your forge. You ought to find some work that I do like. We
could collect wild salads together--pick wild-flowers and sell
them--something like that."

Gaspard sighed.

"But a man's work is his work," he averred.

"There you go again," said Susette, and the accusation was all the more
damning in that it was spoken not in anger, but in grief. "Now that I've
given myself to you--done all that you wished--you want to get rid of
me; you want me to die."

"Haven't I told you a thousand times," cried Gaspard softly and
passionately, "that I love you more than any man has ever loved any
woman? Haven't I spent whole days and nights--yes, years--of my life
desiring you? Haven't I proven it? Come into my arms, Susette. Ah, when
I have you in my arms like this--"

"And it's only like this that I know happiness, my love," breathed the
girl. "Yes; I'm jealous! Jealous of everything that can take you from
me, body or spirit, if even for a moment. All women are like that. We
live in jealousy. What's work? What's ambition, honor, duty, gold as
compared with love?"

But late that night Gaspard the smith roused himself softly from his
couch. He lay there leaning on his elbow and stared out of the window of
his cottage. Susette stirred at his side, undisturbed by the metallic
clinking. Otherwise the night was one of engulfing, mystical silence.

Just outside the cottage the great river Rhone flowed placid and free in
the light of the young moon. Up from the river-bottoms ran the vine-clad
slopes of Burgundy as fragrant as gardens. There was no wind. It was all
swoon and mystery.

"Lord God!" cried Gaspard the smith in his heart.

It was a prayer as much as anything--an inspiration that he couldn't get
otherwise into words.

He was of that race of artist-craftsmen whose forged iron and fretted
steel would continue to stir all lovers of beauty for centuries to come.

"It's true," that inner voice of his spoke again, "that desire is the
driving force of the world. 'Twas desire in the heart of God that led to
creation. 'Tis so with us, His creatures--desire that makes us love and
embellish. But when desire is satisfied, then desire is dead, and
then--and then--"

And yet, as he lay there, buffeted by an emotion which he either would
not or could not express, his eyes gradually focused on the castle of
the great Duke of Burgundy up there on top of the hill--washed in
moonlight, dim and vast; and it was as if he could see the Princess
Gabrielle at her casement, kneeling there, communing with the night as
he was doing.

Did she weep?

He had caught that message in her eyes as she had looked at him up there
in the castle hall--had seen the same message before.

But never had she looked so beautiful--or as she looked now in
retrospect--skin so white, mouth so tender, shape so stately, yet so
slim and graceful. Oddly enough, thought of her now filled him with a
vibrancy, with a longing.

And brave! Hadn't she shown herself to be brave though--to stand up like
that there before her grandfather, him whom all Europe called Louis the
Terrible, and declare herself ready to be welded to the man of her
choice! She wouldn't faint in the presence of horses! And where couldn't
a man go if led by a guardian angel like that? Slaves had become
emperors; blacksmiths had forged armies, become the architects of
cathedrals.

His breathing went deep, then deeper yet. The sweat was on his brow. He
sat up. He seized the chain in his powerful hands, made as if he were
going to tear it asunder.

But after that moment of straining silence he again lifted his face.

"_Seigneur-Dieu_," he panted; "if--if I only had it to do over again!"


VI.

"It's Gaspard the smith," said the frightened page. "He craves the honor
of an interview."

The duke looked up from his parchment.

"Gaspard the smith?"

The duke was seated before the fireplace in the hall. The forge had
been removed; and instead there were some logs smoldering there, for the
morning was cool. But his glance recalled the circumstances of his last
encounter with the smith. The watchful page was quick to seize his cue.

"He comes alone," the page announced.

The duke gave a start, then began to chuckle.

"_Tiens! Tiens!_ He comes alone! 'Tis true, this is the time limit I
set. Send the creature in."

And his highness continued to laugh all the time that the page was gone.
But he laughed softly, for he was alone. Presently he heard a subdued
clinking of steel. He greeted his subject with a sly smile.

Most subjects of Louis the Terrible would have been overjoyed to be
received by their sovereign so graciously. But Gaspard the smith showed
no special joy. He wasn't nearly so proud, either, as he had been that
other time he had appeared before his lord. He bent his knee. He
remained kneeling until the duke told him to get up. The duke was still
smiling.

"So my three days were enough," said his highness.

"Enough and sufficient," quoth the smith.

Now that he was on his feet again he was once more the man. He and the
duke looked at each other almost as equals.

"Tell me about it," said Louis.

"Well, I'll tell you," Gaspard began; "you see, I'm a smith."

"But incapable of forging a chain strong enough to hold a woman."

"I'm not so sure," Gaspard replied. "It was a good chain."

He put out his left wrist and examined it. The steel handcuff was still
there. Up and back from it ran the chain which the smith had been
carrying over his shoulder. He hauled the chain down. He displayed the
other end of it, still ornamented by the companion bracelet.

"What happened? How did she get out of it?" queried the duke.

"She got thin," Gaspard responded with melancholy. "She didn't want me
to work. She wanted the money that I could earn. Yes. She even wanted me
to work. But it had to be her kind of work; something--something--how
shall I say it?--something that wouldn't interfere with our love."

"And you didn't love her?"

"Sure I loved her," flared the smith. "Eh--_bon Dieu_! I wouldn't have
coupled up with her if I hadn't loved her; but, also, I loved something
else. I loved my work. I'm a smith. I'm a shoer of horses, a forger of
iron, a worker in steel. I'm what the good God made me, and I've the
good God's work to do!

"So after a certain amount of honeymoon I had to get back to my forge.
Joseph the carter, his Percherons; who could shoe them but me?"

"And she didn't like that?"

"No. When I made her sit in my forge she pined and whined and refused to
eat. I was crazy. But I did my work. And this morning when I awoke I
found that she had slipped away."

"You were already enchained," said his highness, "by your work."

The smith misunderstood.

"You can see it was no trick chain," he said, holding up the chain he
himself had forged and playing with the links.

"Aye," said the duke, for he loved these philosophic disquisitions, when
he was in the mood for them. "Aye, chains are the nature of the
universe. The planets are chained. The immortal soul is chained to the
mortal body. The body itself is chained to its lusts and frailties."

"I'm a smith," said Gaspard, "and I want to work."

"We're not happy when we are chained," the duke continued to reflect
aloud. "But I doubt that we'd be happier were our chains to disappear.
No matter." He regarded Gaspard the smith with real benignancy. "At
least you've proven the fatal quality of one particular chain--the
thing I wanted to prove. And--you've saved the princess."

"'Twas of her I wanted to speak," Gaspard spoke up. "This is a good
chain. I forged it myself."

"Yes, I know you're a smith," said the duke.

"Well, then," said Gaspard, "I've been thinking. Suppose--now that I've
still got it on me--that we try it on the princess, after all." He
noticed the duke's look of amazement. "I'm willing," said Gaspard. "I'm
willing to have another try--"

"_Dieu de bon Dieu!_" quoth the duke. "Never content!" He recovered
himself. He felt kindly toward the smith. "Haven't you heard?" he
demanded. "The princess has forged a chain of her own. She eloped with
that young Sieur de MÃ¢con the same day you declined to chain her to
yourself."




Transcriber's Note:

Spelling, punctuation and grammar have been retained except as follows:

    Page 18
    bear of leaves _changed to_
    bare of leaves

    Page 36
    enternal laws of logic _changed to_
    eternal laws of logic

    Page 47
    what has love to _changed to_
    what has love to do

    Page 56
    completely locked the hall _changed to_
    completely blocked the hall

    Page 76
    borne a thousand times _changed to_
    born a thousand times

    Page 78
    but the were frozen _changed to_
    but they were frozen

    Page 85
    Flourney studied a moment _changed to_
    Flournoy studied a moment

    Page 86
    "No!" Flourney snapped _changed to_
    "No!" Flournoy snapped

    Page 111
    enlightened her igorance _changed to_
    enlightened her ignorance

    Page 116
    I ain't no bayou _changed to_
    "I ain't no bayou

    Page 145
    Its my old friend _changed to_
    It's my old friend

    Page 158
    No, matter. _changed to_
    No matter.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Ten-foot Chain, by 
Achmed Abdullah and Max Brand and E. K. Means and P. P. Sheehan

